,title,paragraphs
0,singtel-annual-report-2019,"['Much has changed over Singtel’s 140-year history. Technology and innovation has made the mobile phone central to our daily lives. Fitting into the palm of our hands, they serve as gateways to an exciting world of entertainment, information and services. We now stand on the cusp of 5G - an era of hyper-connectivity and newer technologies that will further revolutionise the way we work and play.', 'As a leading communications technology provider, we’re proud to be enablers of such change. Innovation has always been at the core of our business. Our purpose is to keep on pushing boundaries and making breakthroughs, both in our networks and services, so how we live our lives, conduct our businesses, entertain ourselves, keep improving. We are here for the long haul at Singtel, and we’re reimagining your future to bring a better one to you.', '29% Singtel has a track record of generous shareholder payouts.For the financial year ended 31 March 2019, the Board has recommended  a final ordinary dividend of 10.7 Singapore cents a share. Together with  the interim dividend of 6.8 Singapore cents, the total ordinary dividend for the year is 17.5 Singapore cents, unchanged from last year.', 'Strengthened IoT and cloud capabilities• Optus introduced Australia’s first 5G commercial fixed wireless service.• Singtel launched Singapore’s first 5G pilot network.• Consolidated cyber assets globally under the Trustwave brand to form one of the industry’s most comprehensive cyber security companies.• Established the first Global Telco Security Alliance with AT&T, Etisalat, SoftBank and Telefónica to create one of the world’s biggest managed security services platforms.', 'Continued to invest in India’s growth potential• Amobee acquired Videology, a technology provider for advanced TV and video advertising, to unify digital, social and TV advertising on a single platform.• Amobee signed an exclusive agreement with ITV, the UK’s largest commercial broadcaster, to power ITV’s premium video advertising and make their inventory exclusively available through the Amobee technology platform.', 'FY 2019 was more than just a challenging year. I would characterise it as somewhat of a ‘perfect storm’ with intensifying competition across all markets, particularly India and Indonesia, plus the added backdrop of heightened economic uncertainty. These factors, coupled with regional currencies moving significantly against us and reduced contributions from our smaller stake in NetLink Trust, contributed to a 21% decline in our underlying net profit to S$2.83 billion.', 'Both markets also laid the groundwork for 5G. Optus introduced Australia’s first 5G commercial service while Singtel launched Singapore’s first 5G pilot network. New technologies like 5G will converge with IoT and AI to usher in an era of hyper-connectivity that will redefine whole industries and consumer lifestyles. Our 5G investments are part of longer-term plans to position us for future growth.', 'Group’s operations and resources into a single global entity under the Trustwave brand to form one of the industry’s most comprehensive global cyber security companies. Our digital marketing business Amobee has achieved scale, while the acquisition of Videology, a software provider for the high-growth advanced TV and video advertising segments, positions us strongly for a converged media landscape.', 'Your Board is aware that the value of these investments is not being recognised in our share price and management intends to unlock this value at the appropriate time. We are also leveraging our regional scale and partnerships to drive a digital ecosystem across our mobile customer base of more than 690 million.', 'DEEPENING SUSTAINABILITY EFFORTSAs the sustainability conversation evolves, so has Singtel’s efforts in this space. To reduce our carbon footprint even further to align with the global climate agenda, we are exploring long-term renewable energy supply options to help us fulfil our aspiration to be carbon neutral. Our efforts have not gone unnoticed and we continue to be recognised globally in areas such as climate change, governance and diversity. We were one of four Singapore firms and the only Southeast Asian communications company to be listed in the 2019 Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index.', 'GOVERNANCE  On that note, I am happy to welcome Gail Kelly, Bradley Horowitz and Dominic Barton to the Singtel Board. Their respective backgrounds in fi nance, technology and consulting add to our diversity and bring a fresh infusion of expertise. I would also like to express my heartfelt thanks to Peter Mason and Bobby Chin – both of whom are retiring from the Board. Their insights and contributions over the years have been invaluable.', 'Good governance is fundamental for long-term business sustainability and value creation for our stakeholders. Our eff orts on this front continue to be recognised as we were named ASEAN’s Top 5 and Singapore’s Top 3 Publicly Listed Companies at the 2nd ASEAN Corporate Governance Awards. We are committed to maintaining the highest standards of governance and will continue to improve our policies and processes.', 'We expect our associates to deliver positive growth fueled by exponential growth in smartphone adoption and a plethora of applications and content.while driving positive change in our communities. As our digital transformation accelerates, we are investing in building a future-ready team. Our reskilling eff orts include working with researchers and partners within the ecosystem in the areas of cyber security and 5G to develop capabilities for the new economy. Our diversity and inclusiveness are vital to our transformation process. As women comprise half of the Group’s customers, women now constitute a third of our workforce, management and Board which helps us better understand and answer to the needs of our stakeholders. We stay dedicated to the vulnerable segments in our society with our fl agship philanthropy programme, the Singtel Touching Lives’ Fund, supporting the education of children and youth with special needs in Singapore. We are giving back to the larger society, having contributed to Perth’s landmark Optus Stadium last year and most recently, Esplanade’s new waterfront theatre in Singapore.', 'In the course of our 140-year history, we have played a key role in Singapore’s development as a telecommunications hub for the region. Together with our regional associates AIS, Airtel, Globe and Telkomsel, we’ve grown to become Asia’s leading communications technology group, providing an extensive range of telecommunications and digital services to consumers and businesses across Asia, Australia, Africa and the US. Through constant innovation in next-generation technologies and a deep understanding of our markets, we are bringing the future of connectivity closer to our customers.', 'The digital revolution has brought a slew of new opportunities for Singtel as consumers and enterprises embrace the connected world. We are accelerating our digital transformation in preparation for a more intelligent future with the convergence of technologies such as AI, IoT and 5G that will radically change how we live and do business. We have developed new digital growth drivers such as cyber security and digital marketing that leverage our existing assets and strengths in connectivity and smart data. We are also leveraging our regional scale and reach to drive a digital ecosystem, that includes mobile fi nancial services and new forms of content, to unlock the value of our more than 690 million mobile customer base.', 'Mr Simon Israel, 66, is the Chairman of Singapore Post Limited and a Director of Fonterra Co-operative Group Limited and Stewardship Asia Centre CLG Limited. He is also a member of the Governing Board of Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy and Westpac’s Asia Advisory Board. Simon is a former Director of CapitaLand Limited and Stewardship Asia Centre Pte. Ltd.', 'Simon was an Executive Director and President of Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited before retiring on 1 July 2011. Prior to that, he was Chairman, Asia Pacifi c of the Danone Group. Simon also held various positions in Sara Lee Corporation before becoming President (Household & Personal Care), Asia Pacifi c.', 'Simon was conferred Knight in the Legion of Honour by the French government in 2007 and awarded the Public Service Medal at the Singapore National Day Awards 2011. He holds a Diploma in Business Studies from The University of the South Pacifi c.• Non-executive and non-independent Director• Chairman, Singtel Board• Chairman, Finance and Investment Committee• Member, Corporate Governance and Nominations Committee• Member, Executive Resource and Compensation Committee• Member, Optus Advisory Committee• Date of appointment: Director on 4 July 2003 and Chairman on  29 July 2011• Last re-elected: 29 July 2016• Number of directorships in listed companies (including Singtel): 3', 'Gautam sits on the boards of Singapore Airlines Limited, Piramal Enterprises Limited, The Indian Hotels Company Limited, GIC Private Limited and EDBI Pte Ltd. He also serves in several not-for-profi t organisations including Defence Science and Technology Agency, Listings Advisory Committee of the Singapore Exchange, Singapore Legal Service Commission and Yale-NUS College. He was a Director of The Straits Trading Company Limited.', 'Dominic is the Chairman of Teck Resources Limited. He is the Chancellor of the University of Waterloo, the Chairman of the International Integrated Reporting Council, the Canadian Minister of Finance’s Advisory Council on Economic Growth and the Seoul International Business Advisory Council. He is also a trustee of the Brookings Institution, a member of the Singapore Economic Development Board’s International Advisory Council, and a member of the boards of Memorial Sloan Kettering in New York City and the Asia Pacifi c Foundation of Canada. He is one of the founders of FCLT Global.', 'Dominic holds a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) in Economics from the University of British Columbia and a Master of Philosophy in Economics from Oxford University, where he studied as a Rhodes Scholar.• Non-executive and independent Director• Member, Audit Committee• Member, Risk Committee• Date of appointment: 1 March 2018• Last re-elected: 24 July 2018• Number of directorships in listed companies (including Singtel): 4• Non-executive and independent Director• Member, Finance and Investment Committee• Member, Risk Committee• Date of appointment: 25 March 2019 • Number of directorships in listed companies (including Singtel): 2', 'Mr Bobby Chin, 67, is a member of the Council of Presidential Advisers and Chairman of the Corporate Governance Advisory Committee, the Housing & Development Board, NTUC Fairprice Co-operative Limited and NTUC Fairprice Foundation Ltd. He is the Deputy Chairman of NTUC Enterprise Co-operative Limited. He serves on the boards of the Singapore Labour Foundation and Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited. He is Chairman of Frasers Commercial Asset Management Ltd and also a Director of several listed companies, namely Yeo Hiap Seng Limited, Ho Bee Land Limited and AV Jennings Limited.', 'Mr Venkataraman (Venky) Ganesan, 45, is one of the Managing Partners of Menlo Ventures, a top-tier Silicon Valley venture capital fi rm. He focuses on investments in the consumer and enterprise sectors. Venky sits on the boards of several portfolio companies of Menlo Ventures. He is also a Board member of Amobee, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Singtel.', 'Prior to joining Menlo Ventures, Venky was Managing Director at Globespan Capital Partners. Before Globespan, he was one of the founders of Trigo Technologies. He also worked at McKinsey & Company and Microsoft as a Program Manager. He is the former Chair of the National Venture Capital Association and a former Director of Gild, Inc., Handle, Inc., Palo Alto Networks Inc and Virident Systems.', 'Mr Bradley Horowitz, 54, is Vice President of Product Management at Google, Inc. Over the past decade, Bradley has led product development for a wide array of consumer products at Google including Gmail, Google Drive & Docs, Blogger, Google Voice, Google News and Google Photos.  Prior to joining Google, he was the Vice President of Advanced Development at Yahoo, Inc.', 'Gail’s executive banking career spanned 35 years. She was the Group Chief Executive Offi  cer and Managing Director of two banks in Australia – St.George Bank from 2002 to 2007 and Westpac Banking Corporation from 2008 to 2015. She was previously a Director of Woolworths Holdings Limited in South Africa, Country Road Group, David Jones and the Business Council of Australia.', 'Gail holds a Bachelor of Arts and Higher Diploma of Education from the University of Cape Town and a Masters of Business Administration (with Distinction) from the University of the Witwatersrand. She has been awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Business by the University of New South Wales, Macquarie University and Charles Sturt University and an Honorary Doctorate of Science in Economics by the University of Sydney.• Non-executive and independent Director• Member, Finance and Investment Committee• Member, Technology Advisory Panel• Date of appointment: 26 December 2018 • Number of directorships in listed companies (including Singtel): 1• Non-executive and independent Director• Member, Audit Committee• Member, Executive Resource and Compensation Committee• Member, Optus Advisory Committee• Date of appointment: 26 December 2018• Number of directorships in listed companies (including Singtel): 1', 'Peter is a Member of the Order of Australia. He holds a Bachelor of Commerce (First Class Honours), an MBA and an Honorary Doctorate from The University of New South Wales, Australia.•  Non-executive and independent Director•  Chairman, Executive Resource and Compensation Committee•  Chairman, Optus Advisory Committee•  Date of appointment: 21 September 2010•  Last re-elected: 29 July 2016•  Number of directorships in listed companies (including Singtel): 2', 'Mr Low Check Kian, 60, is a Director of Cluny Park Capital. He was previously one of the founding partners of NewSmith Capital Partners LLP (NewSmith), an independent partnership providing corporate fi nance advice and investment management services with its headquarters based in London. Prior to founding NewSmith, he was a Senior Vice President and member of the Executive Management Committee of Merrill Lynch & Co and its Chairman for the Asia Pacifi c region.', 'Check Kian also sits on the boards of Broadcom Limited, Singtel Innov8 Pte. Ltd. and Singtel Innov8 Holdings Pte. Ltd., and is a trustee of the Singapore London School of Economics Trust and Nanyang Technological University. He was a Director of Neptune Orient Lines Limited and Fullerton Fund Management Company Ltd.', 'Ms Teo Swee Lian, 59, is the Chairman of CapitaLand Mall Trust, a Director of AIA Group Ltd, Avanda Investment Management Pte Ltd, Cliff ord Capital Pte. Ltd. and Dubai Financial Services Authority, a member of the Governing Board of the Duke-NUS Medical School and a council member of the Asian Bureau of Finance & Economic Research of NUS Business School.', 'Swee Lian was Special Advisor in the Managing Director’s Offi  ce at the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) until she stepped down in early June 2015. Prior to that, she was the Deputy Managing Director in charge of Financial Supervision at the MAS, where she oversaw macroeconomic surveillance, regulation and supervision of the banking, insurance and capital markets industries.  Swee Lian was also a member of the Corporate Governance Council formed by the MAS and the Singapore Exchange Diversity Action Committee.', 'Mrs Christina Ong, 67, is Co-Chairman and Senior Partner of Allen & Gledhill LLP as well as Co-Head of its Financial Services Department. She is a Director of Hongkong Land Holdings Limited, Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation Limited, SIA Engineering Company Limited and Epimetheus Ltd. Christina is a member of the Catalist Advisory Panel and the Corporate Governance Advisory Committee, a trustee of The Stephen A. Schwarzman Scholars Trust and a member of the Supervisory Committee of the ABF Singapore Bond Index Fund. She also sits on the boards of companies and entities which are owned by Allen & Gledhill LLP. She is a former Director of Singapore Tourism Board and Trailblazer Foundation Ltd.', 'Mr Bill Chang, 52, was appointed Chief Executive Offi  cer, Group Enterprise on 16 July 2012. He leads the infocomm and technology (ICT) team, providing solutions to enterprise customers. He also assumed the role of Country Chief Offi  cer Singapore on 1 October 2014, as principal liaison with local and regulatory bodies.', 'Bill is the Chairman of the Singapore Polytechnic Board of Governors and co-chaired the Future Jobs and Skills Sub-committee of the Committee on the Future Economy of Singapore. He is a member of the Australian Institute of Company Directors’ International Advisory Technology Governance and Innovations Panel, and the Board of Urban Redevelopment Authority of Singapore.', 'Mark ChongMr Mark Chong, 55, was appointed Group Chief Technology Offi  cer on 1 April 2017. He leads the Group’s technology strategy and innovations in the transformation of its networks and businesses across Singapore and Australia. Prior to his appointment, Mark was CEO, International from January 2013 to March 2017.', 'Mr Arthur Lang, 47, is CEO, International having joined Singtel in January 2017. His main responsibilities are to oversee the growth of the Group’s regional associates across Africa, India, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand, strengthen their relationships with overseas partners, and drive regional initiatives, such as the regional mobile fi nancial and gaming businesses, for scale and synergies.', 'Prior to joining Singtel, Arthur was Group Chief Financial Offi  cer of CapitaLand Limited, where he also ran CapitaLand’s real estate fund management business. Prior to CapitaLand, Arthur was at Morgan Stanley where he was Co-head of the Southeast Asia investment banking division and Chief Operating Offi  cer of the Asia Pacifi c investment banking division.', 'Arthur is a board member of Airtel Africa, Globe Telecom, Bharti Infratel Limited, NetLink NBN Trust, the Land Transport Authority of Singapore, the National Kidney Foundation and the Straits Times School Pocket Money Fund. He also sits on the Advisory Board of the Lee Kong Chian School of Business, SMU. In 2018, Arthur was awarded the Public Service Medal for his contributions.', 'Allen began his career with Singtel on 7 November 1980 and has served in various senior management roles, both in Singapore and overseas. His fi rst overseas posting was to Advanced Info Service Public Company Limited (AIS), Singtel’s regional associate. He was the Chief Operating Offi  cer of AIS for three years before his posting to Optus in late 2001, as Managing Director of Optus Mobile and later as Managing Director of Optus Consumer Business. He returned to Singapore as CEO Singapore in 2006.', 'Samba has more than 25 years of corporate and consulting experience across a wide range of senior roles in the areas of strategy, business development and fi nance. He worked for Citibank from 1988 to 1997 and McKinsey & Company from 1999 to 2014. In his last role at McKinsey, he was the Leader of Southeast Asia Technology, Media & Telecommunications practice.', 'Samba holds a Bachelor of Engineering degree in Electrical Engineering with distinction from the Birla Institute of Technology and Science in Pilani, India; a Post Graduate Diploma in Management from the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad, India, and an MBA from the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, USA where he was a Ford Fellow and a Palmer Scholar.', 'Prior to that, William spent 20 years at EDS and had held various senior management roles which included Managing Director of Southeast Asia & India and Vice President, Global Service Delivery of Asia, responsible for leading the Information Technology Outsourcing, Business Process Outsourcing and Applications service delivery across the Asia region. He started his career with the National Computer Board.', 'Aileen graduated with a Bachelor of Arts from the National University of Singapore. She holds a Master of Science in Organisational Behaviour from the California School of Professional Psychology, Alliant International University, US. She is a pioneer IHRP Master Professional, conferred by the IHRP in recognition of her being a role model for the HR profession. She received the Public Service Medal in 2018 for signifi cant contributions to the human resources sectors in Singapore.', 'Yuen Kuan MoonMr Yuen Kuan Moon, 52, was appointed Chief Executive Offi  cer, Consumer Singapore in June 2012. He leads the Singapore consumer business to deliver an integrated suite of mobile, broadband and TV services. Concurrently, Moon is responsible for driving the Group’s digital transformation as Group Chief Digital Offi  cer, a role that was created to unlock digital growth opportunities in an era of disruption.', 'Connecting consumers to a digital futureAs consumers’ lives become more digital, we’ll bring them the convenience they need, connecting them to everything they love just as they’d want it. With our unparalleled network experience and digital services, access to mobile fi nancial services and rich entertainment content, smart living will be even faster and easier. We’re investing in new technologies and innovations to open up a world of digital possibilities, enriching their experiences, and connecting them to a digital future.', 'Group ConsumerSingaporeAs Singapore’s fastest and widest network provider, delivering a great customer experience is our number one priority. We are committed to going beyond coverage and connectivity to deepen our relationship with customers. Besides the latest devices and a wide range of plans, we also offer a host of innovative digital and lifestyle products and services that enhance their lives.', 'CATERING TO CUSTOMERS’ DIGITAL LIFESTYLE NEEDSTo enrich our customers’ digital lifestyles, we developed exciting new products and services to meet their diverse needs. Our all-digital mobile plan, GOMO caters to millennials and digital natives who need huge data allowances and fuss-free terms which allow them to sign up for and manage their plans online. We now offer an Amazon Prime membership that comes with 2-hour delivery times for groceries and entertainment content perks. We also refreshed our XO plans with an expanded line-up, bundled with 24 months of premium HBO GO content on us, so customers can watch hugely popular shows such as Game of Thrones.', 'We are paving the way to 5G by launching Singapore’s first 5G pilot network and first live 5G facility in collaboration with Ericsson and Singapore Polytechnic. Called 5G Garage, the facility allows companies to ideate and test 5G use cases. We also created network history with the first Singapore-Australia 5G augmented reality video call, made to our Optus colleagues in Sydney, Australia.', 'DOUBLING DOWN ON CONTENT AT HOME AND ON-THE-GOQuality content is an important part of our customer engagement strategy. We continue to enhance our Singtel TV and Singtel CAST offerings to connect customers to premium content at great value and on their preferred platforms. During the year, Singtel TV launched e-Le, our second in-house Asian entertainment channel, extended our Premier League rights and added Discovery lifestyle channels, as well as the full-suite of HBO channels. We now offer Premier', 'POWERING UP OUR HOME SERVICESSingapore’s Open Electricity Market initiative marked a new chapter for us. We launched Singtel Power to offer electricity plans to our customers for the first time, partnering Geneco to deliver savings to residential households. With the addition of Singtel Power, we are excited to be a convenient one-stop shop for our customers’ power and communications needs.', 'We know many of our customers are gamers who count on us for reliable and secure broadband connectivity. In 2018, we added an ultrafast broadband service with a dedicated 1Gbps bandwidth specially designed for gaming.  TRANSFORMING THE CUSTOMER SERVICE EXPERIENCEWe are choosing to engage our customers in new ways, strengthening our digitalisation efforts across key touchpoints – at our Singtel shops, online shop, hotline, web chat and My Singtel app. In addition to making purchases online, customers are increasingly turning to our self-help platforms such as our 24/7 self-serve kiosks and My Singtel app for on-demand assistance. More than 65% have opted to complete transactions on these channels. We will continue harnessing technologies such as AI, to provide customers with top-notch service innovations that add value and convenience to their lives.', 'LEADING IN 5G TECHNOLOGYIn January 2019, Singtel, Optus and Ericsson successfully made a 5G video call between Singapore and Australia which used augmented reality - a worldwide first. This proved our 5G agility and was a key step in our commitment to lead 5G delivery in Australia. We also revealed the first details of our game-changing Optus 5G Home Broadband service in the Australian Capital Territory and in the process, became the first carrier in Australia to offer customers a 5G fixed wireless access service.', 'Along with this, National Geographic’s enhanced, new-look app, in partnership with Optus, provides users with a personalised content experience that offers live streaming channels, an immense photo library, digital articles, National Geographic magazine archives and more than 3,000 captivating short-form videos and documentaries, including new content produced with Optus exclusively for the app.', 'We are making sure our customers see the benefits too. We know more and more customers wish to make changes and solve issues digitally, so we continue to provide more digital options for them to do so, including in-app features for My Optus app such as activation, and improved messaging and engagement.', 'Allen: The telecommunications industry has undergone signifi cant disruption and the landscape we face today is very diff erent from before. Our world is increasingly reliant on mobile devices and network access. Mobile devices are often the fi rst thing we look at in the morning and the last thing before we go to bed – and in between, they allow us to communicate, share and stream with our family, friends and co-workers.With increased dependency on our services, customers’ expectations are higher than ever and we’re going further to deliver against them across all parts of our business.', 'Moon: We are upping the ante to create more value for our customers. From connectivity to content, we are creating a range of services and products that give our diff erent customer segments what they need at best value rates. One example is our XO mobile plans bundled with up to 24 months of HBO GO which gives customers the services they need with the content they want.', 'Allen: Optus continues to diff erentiate through our premium national network, exceptional value off ers and game-changing customer experiences. Sustained mobile network investment emphasises our network leadership claims particularly with the introduction of Optus 5G Home Broadband – the fi rst service of its kind in Australia. Our exclusive content is a key diff erentiator. Our customers can’t get enough of Optus Sport and our expanded global content off ering with National Geographic.', 'Moon: We are focused on accelerating the next phase of our transformation, to go beyond our core carriage foundations to deliver the best customer experience possible, whether it’s online or in-person. Our customers tell us they want more content, convenience and digital engagement, with none of the fuss. This presents a great opportunity to deepen our relationship with them. Customers', 'Singtel TV and Singtel CAST off erings of Premier League football, Discovery lifestyle channels and ethnic content on in-house channels Jia Le and e-Le.On average, each household watches more than 100 hours of content a month across multiple platforms so content is a key priority and we will continue to invest in boosting our line-up. In addition, customers can expect more personalisation, such as real-time recommendations on products and services relevant to their needs, and smarter, on-demand, digital customer service.', 'Allen: Globally, there’s a signifi cant shift in viewing behaviour and video consumption. Optus has long recognised that content is king in a digital world and we are investing to bring premium content to our customers where they are, whenever they want it. For example, with sports being such a huge pastime in Australia, I’m proud that Optus is broadcasting all 52 matches of the 2019 FIFA Women’s World Cup which commences in June and cements our reputation as the premium broadcaster of elite football in Australia.', 'Moon: We are seeing 5G deployed as fi xed wireless access solutions in large countries to enable high-speed internet. In Singapore, it’s a diff erent story. With residential fi xed broadband penetration rates at almost 94%, consumers already enjoy one of the world’s fastest connections. We are actively exploring potential 5G use cases, building an ecosystem and preparing our core infrastructure for when spectrum is allocated and standards are fi nalised.', 'Group ConsumerRegional AssociatesAs consumers in the emerging markets grow increasingly reliant on their phones for access to essential services, our regional associates have seen the demand for data and digital services increase dramatically. This has spurred the Singtel Group to build a regional ecosystem of digital services to serve the some 690 million mobile customers across our regional footprint.', 'DIGITALISING TO ENHANCE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCESThe growth in demand for digital services across the region has seen our associates respond quickly with innovative digital products and services. They are investing resources to digitalise processes, developing channels such as online self-care services and fi elding virtual assistants to help them better engage customers and handle the higher volumes of interactions from a growing customer base. Digitalisation has also allowed them to deliver more targeted and personalised content such as music, video and gaming directly through their own mobile apps, such as My Airtel, AIS Play and Telkomsel’s MAXstream.', 'IMPROVING MOBILE FINANCIAL OFFERINGS As a Group, we are improving our mobile fi nancial off erings to bring greater convenience to customers and drive fi nancial inclusion. We are enhancing our mobile wallets, expanding our merchant networks and introducing more services that will help our customers, in particular the unbanked or under-banked, plug into the digital economy. In Indonesia, Telkomsel’s Tcash is now LinkAja, a single mobile payments platform to', 'BUILDING A MOBILE FINANCIAL SERVICES ECOSYSTEM ACROSS THE REGION The Group is leveraging its telco assets and scale to build a mobile financial ecosystem that will unlock growth potential in the region. To realise that vision, we debuted VIA, Asia’s first cross-border mobile payment alliance. VIA gives travellers the convenience of using their local wallets that are part of the alliance at participating merchants in the region at competitive exchange rates, and widens the reach of small merchants to millions of consumers. Initially launched between Singapore and Thailand with AIS and Kasikornbank, VIA will soon be available in more countries such as Malaysia through Axiata Digital’s Boost wallet and Japan through Netstars.', 'We are extending our gaming focus by exploring opportunities with like-minded partners to drive the development of a vibrant gaming community in the region. We signed an MOU with South Korean gaming giant SK Telecom to grow regional gaming leagues, develop content and explore game distribution, with the aim of delivering a more holistic gaming experience for our millennial customers.', 'Arthur: It remained a challenging year for Airtel, but the market in India is starting to stabilise and return to a healthier and more sustainable structure. With customers consuming an average of 11Gb of data each month, I remain optimistic about India’s future in a data-driven economy. Elsewhere in the region, we are starting to see reduced headwinds.', 'Building an ecosystem of digital services for the regiondeliver fi bre broadband in Thailand and Globe ready to launch 5G fi xed wireless home broadband services in the Philippines later this year. We’re also focused on product and services innovation to deliver a better customer experience for our 690 million mobile customers. For instance, in Indonesia, a vibrant hub for start-ups, Telkomsel established an investment fund to help promising companies accelerate growth. This is with a view of tapping into their ideas to enhance our content and digital services off erings that will help us monetise data growth.', 'Arthur: The domestic wallet business is fragmented and hard to diff erentiate, with demand for mobile fi nancial services – not just payments – on the rise. Against this backdrop, we see the potential for our mobile wallet Dash to be the foundation on which to develop a larger ecosystem of fi nancial services. As we expand its merchant network and add more services, Dash is evolving into an app for all our customers’ everyday fi nancial and lifestyle needs whether in-store or online. Our associates are also executing similar strategies with their own mobile wallets.', 'The associates remain some of the strongest operators in their markets, and with high mobile penetration and mobile-fi rst lifestyles in the region, I am excited about the tremendous growth potential of Asia’s emerging markets as we build a regional ecosystem of digital services.localised wallet systems and to address the fragmented payments scene in the region. We see both Dash and VIA as twin engines of growth in mobile fi nancial services.', 'Arthur: VIA is the key to connecting the region and beyond with an interoperable platform that allows any wallet to easily tap into a larger consumer and merchant network across Asia. This means partners can access a huge addressable market with us as we build up the alliance, just as our customers will enjoy greater connectivity and shopping options across the region.', 'This also opens up smaller hyper-local merchants to a much larger pool of customers. The reach of the network has tremendous potential to benefi t everyone. With such a platform, we can branch out to off er a greater range of fi nancial services. We look forward to engaging the rest of our associates and inviting more partners to VIA as we enter into the second stage of this journey.', 'Arthur: Our esports initiatives are part of the Group’s larger eff orts to grow our digital content business and engage millennial and Gen Z audiences. Our services such as content, high-speed broadband and payments, along with the billing relationships we have with customers, put us in a unique position to off er digital services, making gaming more accessible while improving the experience.', 'The aim is for PVP, our gaming brand, to be a major ecosystem partner in the regional gaming and esports scene. Through our PVP Esports leagues and collaboration with like-minded partners, we hope to bring gaming into the mainstream and connect with gamers and youths. We are excited to be sponsoring Singapore’s fi rst esports SEA Games teams in 2019 and look forward to bigger things to come.  We see tremendous opportunity in the network eff ect of the gaming community and believe in the long-term prospects of this market.', 'Preparing enterprises for a smart futureThe convergence of technologies such as 5G, IoT and AI is starting to disrupt and redefi ne entire industries. The future of logistics, for example, could see autonomous vehicles that vastly improve navigation safety and fl eet management. Unmanned robots and drones would make inventory management and order fulfi lment faster and more effi  cient. With our enterprise services and advanced cyber security solutions, we’re helping enterprises leverage the transformative power of technology to get ahead in the future economy.', 'Singapore Telecommunications Limited  |  Annual Report 2019 42the enhanced 99%SME platform with IMDA which garnered strong support from our partners. The platform combines critical business intelligence, last-mile delivery options, and new omni-channel retail and customer engagement features to help SMEs grow their customer base, using both offline and online presence.', 'As advancements in technology continue to disrupt industries, our focus at Group Enterprise is on helping enterprises prepare for the future by accelerating their digital transformation, realising the possibilities enabled by new and disruptive technologies, and unlocking new growth opportunities. Through R&D and innovation, we are reimagining the future of industries and bringing it closer to customers.', 'BRINGING THE FUTURE CLOSERAs more nations race to build smart cities and digitalise their economies, rapid changes are sweeping across industries, redefining how enterprises and their value chains operate. To help enterprises transition to and navigate this new digital economy, we continue to develop services, solutions and platforms to spur innovation, rethink business models, redefine customer experiences, engage employees and improve productivity.', 'Note:(1) Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.', '43cornerstone of a digital economy. Last year, we launched Singapore’s first 5G pilot network at one-north with Ericsson. We also partnered with Ericsson and Singapore Polytechnic to open the nation’s first live 5G facility – 5G Garage – on campus which serves as a training centre, test bed and ideation lab to develop Singapore’s own 5G ecosystem.', 'PROTECTING ENTERPRISES As we move towards a hyper-connected digital future, the risk of cyber threats becomes even greater. To safeguard enterprises against a growing slew of fast-evolving cyber threats, we consolidated our cyber security assets under the Trustwave brand, to form one of the industry’s most comprehensive global cyber security companies. We continue to develop our cyber security capabilities to position ourselves to lead and shape the cyber security sphere. Our global network of Advanced Security Operations Centres is now supported by the new Trustwave SpiderLabs Fusion Centre in Chicago, a cutting-edge cyber security command centre providing unprecedented threat hunting capabilities through pioneering threat intelligence. We also acquired Hivint, an award-winning cyber security consulting company in Australia, enhancing  our consulting capabilities.', 'Singtel executives demonstrating how IoT and AI can enhance companies’ competitive advantage to Singapore’s Minister for Communications and Information S Iswaran (third from left) at MWC Barcelona 2019.integrated into Singtel’s managed security services. The partnership will facilitate the future introduction of connected cars and new technologies such as autonomous vehicles.', 'STRENGTHENING CORE CAPABILITIES Strong core capabilities are key to powering new technologies and helping customers accelerate their own digital journey. Even as we develop new services, we continue to strengthen and digitalise our core. We launched Liquid Infrastructure, a next-generation data-driven, highly agile, intelligent platform that integrates physical and virtual network services. The platform, designed for use with services such as optimised cloud access, virtual network function and IoT, allows enterprises to configure their networks with ease and deploy resources when needed.', 'Our own experience in the telco industry is a good example. The smartphone started the mobile internet and data revolution, disrupting our traditional telco revenues in voice services. We had to respond quickly by developing new business models around data and digital while preserving the value in our core business.', 'This is a dilemma and challenge that companies routinely face. While they recognise the need to digitalise, they aren’t moving fast enough nor do they have the digital capabilities to do so eff ectively. The Singapore Government has been trying to address this by throwing its support behind various initiatives, building digital ecosystems and pushing for greater industry collaboration. But enterprises also need a reliable partner to help chart their digital roadmap, and guide and catalyse their operations.', 'Bill: Our own transformation experience, coupled with our expertise, positions us well to help enterprises. With our solutions in data analytics, cloud, cyber security, robotics, automation, IoT and 5G, enterprises can kick-start their digitalisation journey, maximise effi  ciencies and even develop new business models. The beauty of these solutions is the fact that it can benefi t any size of enterprise – from one-person operations to multinationals.', 'Enterprises which are already digitalising can partner and use our resources to co-create and test concepts in a secure environment like our FutureNow Innovation Centre which we launched in August. They can also tap into our R&D labs to test technologies like AI, cyber security, augmented reality and automation to reimagine the customer experience and redefi ne their businesses, products and services. We have developed a framework for digital transformation where design thinking', 'Bill: As advanced connectivity is a prerequisite for digitalisation, we have strengthened our core network capabilities with software-defi ned networks to improve reliability, resource management and effi  ciency. This has allowed us to develop capabilities in new technologies that will change the way enterprises and industries operate, such as cloud, cyber security, IoT, analytics, 5G, AI and robotics.', 'Critically, with the rise in cyber attacks globally, the deployment of these systems needs to be secure. With our consolidated cyber security capabilities and resources provided by our global cyber security brand – Trustwave – we not only monitor but are able to detect, hunt and coordinate an eff ective response to address cyber threats within an enterprise’s infrastructure. This helps us better secure enterprises and innovate new services and solutions to stay ahead of the competition.', 'This is already playing out in the maritime space, where analytics, cloud and IoT are being dovetailed to monitor the performance of ships in real time and predict issues before they occur. This will help enterprises to be safer and more effi  cient when managing their fl eets. Healthcare is also undergoing a digital overhaul, empowering doctors to remotely perform and monitor complex surgeries in real time, maximising effi  ciencies and extending their expertise to patients worldwide. Backed by actionable data insights, enterprises will be able to build digital business systems that will give them that highly coveted competitive advantage.', 'Building relationships in a connected worldToday’s consumers and enterprises are switching easily between multiple channels, screens and devices, expecting more seamless experiences from the brands they engage with. To better reach and build relationships with our customers, we need to lead disruption and anticipate their needs. We help marketers gain a unifi ed view of their audiences and cut through the noise, engage users with the best content and services, and drive unique insights.', 'AMOBEE EXPANDS CAPABILITIESDigital and traditional TV advertising are converging as advertisers seek to engage tech-savvy customers across multiple screens and platforms. This will have a profound impact on global advertising as brands and agencies find new tools and solutions to improve how they reach digital consumers. Amobee continues to enhance its platform as an end-to-end, unified omnichannel solution through technology development and strategic partnerships to empower marketers to seize this converged media opportunity.', 'A key step to this strategy was the acquisition of Videology, a technology provider for advanced TV and video advertising. Amobee can now unify and optimise critical consumer intelligence and campaign spend across traditional TV and digital channels for advertisers. This strategy has already gained traction, attracting new partnerships with ITV, the UK’s largest commercial broadcaster and Univision, the number one Spanish language broadcaster in the US. Advertisers can now get advanced solutions and programmatic access to the portfolio of premium digital video inventory across ITV channels, exclusively through the Amobee platform.', 'HOOQ AND DATASPARK CONTINUE TO GROWThe popularity of media streaming services has gone up exponentially and HOOQ aims to be one of the largest OTT content providers in Southeast Asia, while maintaining market leadership in Indonesia. To do so, we are constantly updating HOOQ’s content to meet consumer demand and target mass market segments more effectively.', 'Over the past year, HOOQ has transformed its business model to offer affordable daily plans, as well as a freemium layer which includes free-to-air channels, Advertising Video on Demand and Subscription Video on Demand. To drive further audience growth and scale, HOOQ established strategic partnerships with Hotstar in India and Grab in Southeast Asia to provide in-app viewing and easy access to HOOQ content.', 'DataSpark continues to help businesses and government agencies harness the power of geospatial data for planning and decision-making. It has developed Mobility Genomes, a suite of data products and simulation tools to address high-impact use cases in transport, out-of-home advertising, tourism and radio network engineering. DataSpark has been working with various Australian state transport authorities on innovative applications of population-wide mobility data to solve traffic problems as part of Australia’s transport infrastructure planning.', 'INNOV8 DRIVES INNOVATIONConstant innovation is key to staying relevant in a digital economy. Innov8 remains focused on identifying and investing in innovative start-ups with technologies and solutions that enhance the Group’s capabilities and drive value for our customers. Some of the notable investments in 2018 include Halodoc, an Indonesian digital health platform that aims to simplify access to healthcare by building an ecosystem that caters to the entire patient journey; CXA Group, Asia’s first population health ecosystem for employers; and Data Republic, an inter-organisational data exchange platform headquartered in Sydney, that allows businesses to exchange information securely.', 'Samba: The developments in our businesses last year have really strengthened their foundations for growth in the coming fi nancial year. Acquiring Videology and integrating it into Amobee’s platform makes Amobee one of the fi rst in the advertising technology market to unify TV, digital and social into a single platform. HOOQ’s strategic digital partnerships with Grab and Hotstar will enhance its ability to scale in their respective markets, while DataSpark’s focus on out-of-home advertising, transport and telco network planning is gaining greater market acceptance in Southeast Asia and Australia.', 'Upping the game in digitalattention towards value realisation for these businesses. This could be in the form of additional strategic partners coming on board as stakeholders in the entity, or through an IPO. We also look to better inform the investment community on the real value of these businesses, as they are quite diff erent from our traditional core businesses and should be valued with metrics appropriate for their respective industries.', 'We also hope to do more broadcaster deals like the agreement we reached with the UK’s largest commercial broadcaster, ITV, to create their own “walled garden” for advertising, exclusively within the Amobee platform. Our technology enables broadcasters to digitally upgrade their TV and video advertising capabilities to create value for advertisers, and be competitive in digital advertising markets where Google and Facebook dominate.', 'The developments in our businesses last year have really strengthened their foundations for growth in the coming fi nancial year... As we continue to build operating momentum, we are turning our attention towards value realisation for these businesses.agreement with Grab, where HOOQ’s streaming service will be integrated within Grab’s environment and their customers will enjoy a seamless video experience during their Grab interaction. These partnerships let us expand our audience, and when combined with the assets we’ve built, place us in a strong position to grow.', 'In addition to acquisitions and organic growth, we are also looking at other investment strategies in which we identify and invest in emerging growth companies through Innov8, especially those that are fi lling the gaps left by traditional infrastructure or are disrupting and improving service delivery through their digital solutions. These are companies that create value for our customers, particularly in emerging markets. Given our footprint, we can by extension, help them scale their business and expand in the region.', 'An example this year is Halodoc, an Indonesian digital health platform that aims to simplify access to healthcare by building an ecosystem that caters to the entire patient journey. We are working closely with our investee companies to support their development, including providing access to data analytics and advertising capabilities to enhance their digital off erings.', 'Making the future better for our stakeholdersGood governance and responsible business practices are fundamental to our sustainable, long-term growth and value creation for our stakeholders. We strive to harness advances in digital technologies to improve lives and to leave the smallest environmental footprint possible as part of global eff orts to limit climate change because reimagining the future means making it better as well.', 'Key ObjectivesEstablish and review the profile of Board members;  make recommendations to the Board on the appointment, re-nomination and retirement of Directors; review the independence of Directors; assist the Board in evaluating  the performance of the Board, Board Committees and  Directors; and develop and review the Company’s corporate governance practices', 'INTRODUCTIONSingtel aspires to the highest standards of corporate governance as we believe that good governancesupports long-term value creation. To this end, Singtel has in place a set of well-defined policies and processes to enhance corporate performance and accountability, as well as protect the interests of stakeholders. The Board of Directors is responsible for Singtel’s corporate governance standards and policies, and stresses their importance across the Group.', 'Singtel is listed on the Singapore Exchange Securities Trading Limited (SGX) and has complied in all material respects with the principles and provisions in the Singapore Code of Corporate Governance 2018  (2018 Code). This report sets out Singtel’s key  corporate governance practices with reference  to the 2018 Code. We provide a summary of our compliance with the express disclosure requirements  in the 2018 Code on pages 84 to 86.', 'Simon Israel 6 6 – – ✓Chua Sock Koong 6 6 – – ✓Gautam Banerjee 6 6 1 1 ✓Dominic Barton (2) 1 – – – –Bobby Chin 6 6 1 1 ✓Venkataraman (Venky) Ganesan 6 5 1 1 ✓Bradley Horowitz (3) 2 2 – – –Gail Kelly (4) 2 2 – – –Low Check Kian 6 6 1 1 ✓Peter Mason AM (5) 6 6 1 1 ✓Christina Ong 6 6 1 1 ✓Teo Swee Lian 6 6 1 1 ✓Peter Ong (6) 1 1 – – ✓', 'Notes:(1)  Refers to meetings held/attended while each Director was in office.(2)  Mr Dominic Barton was appointed to the Board on 25 March 2019.(3) Mr Bradley Horowitz was appointed to the Board on 26 December 2018.(4) Mrs Gail Kelly was appointed to the Board on 26 December 2018.(5)  Member of the Order of Australia.(6)  Mr Peter Ong stepped down from the Board following the conclusion of the AGM on 24 July 2018.', 'BOARD MATTERSThe Board’s Conduct of AffairsThe Board aims to create value for shareholders and ensure the long-term success of the Group by focusing on the development of the right strategy, business model, risk appetite, management, succession plan and compensation framework. It also seeks to align the interests of the Board and Management with that of shareholders and balance the interests of all stakeholders. In addition, the Board sets the tone for the entire organisation where ethics and values are concerned.', 'The Board oversees the business affairs of the Singtel Group. It assumes responsibility for the Group’s overall strategic plans and performance objectives, financial plans and annual budget, key operational initiatives, major funding and investment proposals, financial performance reviews, compliance and accountability systems, and corporate governance practices. The Board also appoints the Group CEO, approves policies and guidelines on remuneration as well as the remuneration for the Board and Senior Management, and approves the appointment of Directors. In line with best practices in corporate governance, the Board also oversees the long-term succession planning for Senior Management.', 'Singtel has established financial authorisation and approval limits for operating and capital expenditure, the procurement of goods and services, and the acquisition and disposal of investments. The Board approves transactions exceeding certain threshold limits, while delegating authority for transactions below those limits to the Board Committees and the Management Committee to optimise operational efficiency.', 'Board meetingsThe Board and Board Committees meet regularly to discuss strategy, operational matters and governance issues. All Board and Board Committee meetings are scheduled well in advance of each year in consultation with the Directors. At every scheduled meeting, the Board sets aside time for discussion without the presence of Management (except the executive Director). The Board also sets aside time for the non-executive Directors to meet without any executives present. The independent Directors meet at least once a year, at a meeting chaired by the Lead Independent Director. The Board holds approximately six scheduled meetings each year, and may also hold ad hoc meetings as and when warranted by particular circumstances. Six Board meetings were held in the financial year ended 31 March 2019.', 'Typically, one Board meeting a year is held in Australia, where one of Singtel’s key subsidiaries, Optus, is located. In addition, the Board makes an overseas trip annually to a country where the Group has a significant investment or has an interest in investing, or where Board members can be exposed to new technology relevant to the Group’s growth strategy. On such occasions, the Board may meet with local business leaders and government officials so as to help Board members gain greater insight into such countries. The Board also meets Singtel’s partners and key customers in those countries to develop stronger relationships with such partners and customers. Singtel also arranges for the Board to meet with experts in the technology/digital space to enhance their knowledge in new growth areas and enable the Board to make more informed decisions. Board meetings may include presentations by senior executives and external consultants/experts on strategic issues relating to  specific business areas, as well as presentations by the Group’s associates. This allows the Board to develop a good understanding of the Group’s businesses and to promote active engagement with the Group’s partners and key executives.', 'All new Directors appointed to the Board are briefed  by the Chairman, as well as the chairmen of the  Board Committees, on issues relevant to the Board and Board Committees. They are also briefed by Senior Management on the Group’s business activities, strategic direction and policies, key business risks, the regulatory environment in which the Group operates and  governance practices, as well as their statutory and  other duties and responsibilities as Directors.a Directors’ Manual, which sets out the Director’s duties and responsibilities and the Board governance policies and practices. The Directors’ Manual is maintained by theCompany Secretary. In line with best practices in corporate governance, new Directors also sign a letter of appointment from the Company stating clearly the role of the Board and non-executive Directors, the time commitment that the Director would be expected to allocate and other relevant matters.', 'To ensure Directors can fulfil their obligations and to continually improve the performance of the Board, all Directors are encouraged to undergo continual professional development during the term of their appointment. Professional development may relate to a particular subject area, committee membership, or key developments in Singtel’s environment, market or operations. Directors are encouraged to consult the Chairman if they consider that they personally, or the Board as a whole, would benefit from specific education or training regarding matters that fall within the responsibility of the Board or relate to the business of Singtel.', 'During the financial year ended 31 March 2019, the development/training programmes for Directors included the following:workshop with Senior Management to formulate and plan the Group’s longer-term strategy, during which the Directors were briefed on developments in the markets in which the Group operates and were introduced to new technologies and advancements relevant to the Group.', 'There are 12 Directors on the Board, comprising 10  non-executive independent Directors, one non-executive non-independent Director and one executive Director.  The Board has appointed a Lead Independent Director.  A summary of the role of the Lead Independent Director is set out on page 63. The profiles of the Directors are set out on pages 15 to 20.', 'The size and composition of the Board are reviewed from time to time by the Corporate Governance and ensure that the size of the Board is conducive for effective discussion and decision making, and that the Board has an appropriate number of independent Directors. skills and attributes among the Directors. Any potential conflicts of interest are taken into consideration.', 'In order to ensure that Singtel continues to be able to meet the challenges and demands of the markets in which Singtel operates, the Board is focused on enhancing the diversity of skills, expertise and perspectives on the Board in a structured way by proactively mapping out Singtel’s Board composition needs over the short and medium term.', 'The Board’s Diversity Policy provides that, in reviewing will consider the benefits of all aspects of diversity, including diversity of skills, experience, background, gender, age, ethnicity and other relevant factors. These differences will be considered in determining the optimum composition of the Board and when possible should be balanced appropriately. All Board appointments are made based on merit, in the context of the skills, experience, independence and knowledge which the Board as a whole requires to be effective. Diversity is a key criterion in the instructions to external search consultants.', 'The Board is of the view that gender is an important aspect of diversity and will strive to ensure that (a) any brief to external search consultants to search for candidates for appointment to the Board will include a requirement to present female candidates, (b) female candidates are included for consideration by the appointment to the Board, (c) the Board appoints at significant and appropriate female representation on the Board, recognising that the Board’s needs will change over time taking into account the skills and experience of the Board.', 'Reflecting the focus of the Group’s business in the region, six of Singtel’s 12 Directors are from, and have extensive experience in, jurisdictions outside Singapore, namely, the Chairman, Mr Simon Israel, and non-executive Directors, Messrs Dominic Barton, Venky Ganesan, Bradley Horowitz and Peter Mason AM, and Mrs Gail Kelly. In relation to gender diversity, 33% of the Singtel Board, or four out of the 12 Board members, are female. Other than the Group CEO, none of the Directors is a former or current employee of the Company or its subsidiaries.', 'Independenceassesses the independence of each Director annually in accordance with the guidance in the 2018 Code. A Director is considered independent if he has no relationship with the Company, its related corporations, its substantial shareholders or its officers that could interfere, or be reasonably perceived to interfere, with  the exercise of his independent business judgement in  the best interests of Singtel.', 'The Board takes into account the existence of relationships or circumstances, including those identified by the listing rules of the Singapore Stock Exchange and related Practice Guidance, that are relevant in its determination as to whether a Director is independent. Such relationships or circumstances include the employment of a Director by the Company or any of its related corporations during the financial year in question or in any of the previous three financial years; a Director being on the Board for an aggregate period of more than nine years; a Director providing to or receiving from the Company or any of its subsidiaries significant payments or material services during the financial year in question or the previous financial year, other than compensation for board service; and a Director being related to any organisation to which the Company or any of its subsidiaries made, or from which the Company or any of its subsidiaries received, significant payments or material services during the financial year in question or the previous financial year.', 'Based on the declarations of independence provided  by the Directors and taking into account the guidance  in the 2018 Code, the Board has determined that  Ms Chua Sock Koong, Singtel’s Group CEO and Mr Simon Israel, Chairman of the Singtel Board, are the only non-independent Directors. All other members of the Board  are considered to be independent Directors. In line with  the Board’s Code of Conduct and Ethics, each member  of the CGNC and the Board recused himself or herself  from the CGNC’s and the Board’s deliberations  respectively on his or her own independence.', 'Mr Simon Israel is considered non-independent as he had previously been deemed non-independent by virtue of his previous roles as a non-executive director, and subsequently executive director, of Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited (Temasek). He stepped down from Temasek in June 2011. Temasek has an interest of approximately 52% as at 31 March 2019.', 'Mr Bobby Chin was appointed to the Singtel Board on  1 May 2012 as an independent Director and to the Board  of Directors of Temasek on 10 June 2014. After due consideration, the Board continues to regard Mr Chin as independent as he does not represent Temasek on the Singtel Board and he is not accustomed or under an obligation, whether formal or informal, to act in accordance with the directions, instructions or wishes of Temasek. As Mr Chin has demonstrated independence in character and judgement in the discharge of his responsibilities as a Director, the Board is satisfied that  he will continue to exercise independent judgement  and act in the best interests of Singtel and its security holders generally.', 'Mr Bobby Chin, Mrs Christina Ong, Mr Low Check Kian  and Mr Gautam Banerjee are board members of organisations that purchase services and/or equipment from the Singtel Group in the ordinary course of  business. The Directors’ roles in those organisations are non-executive in nature and they are not involved in the day-to-day conduct of the business of those organisations. In addition, Mrs Ong is a partner of Allen & Gledhill LLP (A&G). A&G provides legal services to, and receives fees from, the Singtel Group. However, Mrs Ong has an interest of less than 5% in A&G. Mrs Ong is also on the board of Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation Limited, which provides banking services in the ordinary course of business to the Singtel Group. The Board is of the view that the abovementioned relationships do not interfere with the exercise of the Directors’ independent business judgement in the best interests of Singtel.', 'Mr Venky Ganesan is a director of BitSight Technologies, Inc (BitSight). Singtel’s subsidiary, Singtel Innov8 Pte Ltd, has an interest of less than 2% in BitSight. The investment in BitSight by Singtel Innov8 Pte Ltd was made independent of Mr Ganesan’s association with Singtel. The Board is of the view that the abovementioned relationships do not interfere with the exercise of  Mr Ganesan’s independent business judgement in the best interests of Singtel.', 'Conflicts of InterestUnder the Board’s Code of Conduct and Ethics, Directors must avoid situations in which their own personal or business interests directly or indirectly conflict, or appear to conflict, with the interests of Singtel. The Code of Conduct and Ethics provides that where a Director has a conflict of interest, or it appears that he might have a conflict of interest, in relation to any matter, he should immediately declare his interest at a meeting of the Directors or send a written notice to the Company containing details of his interest and the conflict, and recuse himself from participating in any discussion and decision on the matter. Where relevant, the Directors have complied with the provisions of the Code of Conduct and Ethics, and such compliance has been duly recorded in the minutes of meeting.', 'The Chairman and the Group CEOThe Chairman of the Board is a non-executive appointment and is separate from the office of the Group CEO. The Chairman leads the Board and is responsible for ensuring the effectiveness of the Board and its governance processes, while the Group CEO is responsible for implementing the Group’s strategies  and policies, and for conducting the Group’s business. The Chairman and the Group CEO are not related.', 'Role of the ChairmanThe Chairman is responsible for leadership of the  Board and is pivotal in creating the conditions for overall Board, Board Committee and individual Director effectiveness, both inside and outside the boardroom. This includes setting the agenda of the Board in consultation with the Directors and the Group CEO,  and promoting active engagement and an open dialogue among the Directors, as well as between the Board and the Group CEO.', 'The Chairman ensures that the performance of the  Board is evaluated regularly, and guides the development needs of the Board. The Chairman leads the evaluation of the Group CEO’s performance and works with the Group CEO in overseeing talent management to ensure that robust succession plans are in place for the senior leadership team.', 'The Chairman also maintains effective communications with large shareholders and supports the Group CEO in engaging with a wide range of other stakeholders such as partners, governments and regulators where the Group operates. He travels overseas to visit the Group’s key associates in the region and, in the process, fosters strong relationships with the Group’s partners and gathers valuable feedback for Management to consider and follow up on.', 'The scope and extent of the Chairman’s and the Board’s responsibilities and obligations have been expanding  due to the increased focus on corporate governance,  risk management, regulation and compliance. The Board has agreed with the Chairman that he will commit a significant proportion of his time to his role and will manage his other time commitments accordingly.', 'Role of the Lead Independent Director The Lead Independent Director is appointed by the Board to serve in a lead capacity to coordinate the activities of the non-executive Directors in circumstances where it would be inappropriate for the Chairman to serve in such capacity. He also assists the Chairman and the Board to assure effective corporate governance in managing the affairs of the Board and the Company.', 'The Lead Independent Director serves as chairman of includes meeting with the independent Directors at least annually. He provides feedback on the meeting(s) to the Board and/or the Chairman as appropriate. He will also be available to shareholders if they have concerns relating to matters that contact through the Chairman, Group CEO or Group CFO has failed to resolve, or where such contact is inappropriate.', 'When an existing Director chooses to retire or is required to retire from office by rotation, or the need for a new skills and attributes of the Board and the composition of prepares a shortlist of candidates with the appropriate profile for nomination or re-nomination. The Board has an ongoing process facilitated by an independent consultant to map out these needs and to search for candidates to join the Board.preparedness, participation and candour into consideration when evaluating the past performance and contributions of a Director when making its recommendations to the Board. However, the  re-nomination or replacement of a Director does not necessarily reflect the Director’s performance or consider the need to position and shape the Board in  line with the evolving needs of Singtel and the business.', '63appointed for an initial term of three years, and this may be extended to a second three-year term. As a general rule, a Director shall step down from the Board no later than at the Annual General Meeting (AGM) to be held in his sixth year of service. Where a Director is not appointed at an AGM, the Director’s term will be deemed to have commenced on the date of the AGM immediately following the date on which the Director was appointed. The Committee may, in appropriate circumstances, recommend to the Board that a Director’s term be extended beyond the second three-year term, for a period of up to three years. For Chairman, the same principles apply except that the term is determined from the point he became Chairman.', 'Directors must ensure that they are able to give sufficient time and attention to the affairs of Singtel and, as part a Director is able to do so and whether he has been adequately carrying duties as a Director of Singtel. The Board has also adopted an internal guideline that seeks to address the competing time commitments that may be faced when a Director holds multiple board appointments. The guideline provides that, as a general rule, each Director should hold no more than five directorships in public listed companies. However, the Board recognises that the individual circumstances and capacity of each Director are different and there may be circumstances in which a different limit on board appointments is appropriate. The guideline also provides that (a) in support of their candidature for directorship details of other commitments and an indication of the time involved, and (b) non-executive Directors should accepting any new appointments as Directors. There are no alternate Directors on the Board.', 'A retiring Director is eligible for re-election by Singtel shareholders at the AGM. In addition, a Director appointed by the Board to fill a casual vacancy or appointed as an additional Director may only hold  office until the next AGM, at which time he will be  eligible for re-election by shareholders. If at any AGM, fewer than three Directors would retire pursuant to the requirements set out above, the additional Directors to retire at that AGM shall be those who have been longest in office since their last re-election or appointment.', 'The Group CEO, as a Director, is subject to the same retirement by rotation, resignation and removal provisions as the other Directors, and such provisions will not be subject to any contractual terms that may have been entered into with the Company. Shareholders are provided with relevant information in the Annual Report on the candidates for election or re-election.', 'Board Performance the effectiveness of the Board, the Board Committees  and individual Directors. For the financial year ended31 March 2019, as in previous years, an independent external consultant (2019: Aon Hewitt Singapore) was appointed to facilitate this process. The 2019 survey was designed to provide an evaluation of the effectiveness of the Board, Board Committees, Chairman and individual Directors, as well as provide insights on the Board culture. The Directors were requested to complete evaluation questionnaires on matters such as Board composition, Board processes, representation of shareholders and environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues, managing company performance, Board strategy and priorities, Board Committee effectiveness, CEO performance and succession planning, director development and management, and risk management.  Senior management were also requested to complete questionnaires covering the development/monitoring of strategy, the relationship between the Board and management, risk management, representation of shareholders and ESG issues, and Board Committee effectiveness.', 'In addition to the appraisal exercise, the contributions and performance of each Director are assessed by  composition of the Board and the various Board areas for improving the effectiveness of the Board and Board Committees. The Board is also able to assess the Board Committees through their regular reports to the Board on their activities.', 'Access to informationPrior to each Board meeting, Singtel’s Management provides the Board with information relevant to matters on the agenda for the meeting. In general, such information is provided a week in advance of the Board meeting. The Board also receives regular reports pertaining to the operational and financial performance of the Group, as well as regular updates, which include information on the Group’s competitors, and industry and', 'Corporate Governancetechnological developments. In addition, Directors receive analysts’ reports on Singtel and other telecommunications and digital companies on a quarterly basis. Such reports enable the Directors to keep abreast of key issues and developments in the industry, as well as challenges and opportunities for the Group. In line with Singtel’s commitment to the conservation of the environment, as well as technology advancement, Singtel has done away with hard copy Board papers, and Directors are instead provided with tablet devices to enable them to access and read Board and Board Committee papers prior to and at meetings.', 'Role of the Company SecretaryThe Company Secretary attends all Board meetings  and is accountable directly to the Board, through the Chairman, on all matters to do with the proper functioning of the Board, including advising the Board on corporate and administrative matters, as well as facilitating orientation and assisting with professional development as required. She assists the Board in implementing and strengthening corporate governance policies and processes. The Company Secretary is the primary point of contact between the Company and the SGX. The Company Secretary is legally trained, with experience in legal matters and company secretarial practices. The appointment and removal of the Company Secretary is subject to the approval of the Board.', 'The selection of Board Committee members requires careful management to ensure that each committee comprises Directors with appropriate qualifications  and skills, and that there is an equitable distribution of  responsibilities among Board members. The need to maximise the effectiveness of the Board, and encourage active participation and contribution from Board members, is also taken into consideration.', 'The terms of reference of the AC provide that the AC  shall comprise at least three Directors, all of whom  are non-executive Directors and the majority, includingthe chairman, are independent Directors. At least two members of the AC, including the AC chairman, must have recent and relevant accounting or related financial management expertise or experience. The chairmanof the AC is a Director other than the Chairman of theSingtel Board. The AC has explicit authority to investigate any matter within its terms of reference, and has full cooperation and access to Management. It has direct access to the internal and external auditors, and full discretion to invite any Director or executive officer to attend its meetings,', 'The AC reports to the Board on the results of the audits undertaken by the internal and external auditors, the adequacy of disclosure of information, and the adequacy and effectiveness of the system of risk management and internal controls. It reviews the quarterly and annual financial statements with Management and the external auditors, reviews and approves the annual audit plans for the internal and external auditors, and reviews the internal and external auditors’ evaluation of the Group’s system of internal controls.', 'The AC is responsible for evaluating the cost effectiveness of external audits, the independence and objectivity of the external auditors, and the nature and extent of the non-audit services provided by the external auditors to ensure that the independence of the external auditors is not compromised. It also makes recommendations to the Board on the appointment or re-appointment, remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditors. In addition, the AC approves the Singtel Internal Audit Charter and reviews the internal audit function for independence and effectiveness, adequacy of resourcing, including staff qualifications and experience, and its standing within Singtel. The AC also reviews the performance of Internal Audit, including approving decisions relating to appointment or removal of Group Chief Internal Auditor and approving the performance and compensation of the Group Chief Internal Auditor. Based on this, the AC is satisfied that the internal audit function is independent, effective and adequately resourced.', 'During the financial year, the AC reviewed the Management’s and Singtel Internal Audit’s assessment of fraud risk and held discussions with the external auditors to obtain reasonable assurance that adequate measures were put in place to mitigate fraud risk exposure in the Group. The AC also reviewed the adequacy of the whistle-blower arrangements instituted by the', 'The AC met five times during the financial year. At these  meetings, the Group CEO, Group Chief Corporate Officer, Group CFO, Vice President (Group Finance), Group Chief Internal Auditor and the respective CEOs of the businesses were also in attendance. During the financial year, the AC reviewed the results of audits performed by Internal Audit based on the approved audit plan, significant litigation and fraud investigations, register of interested person transactions and non-audit services rendered by the external auditors. The AC also met with the internal and external auditors, without the presence of Management, during the financial year.', 'The external auditors provided regular updates and periodic briefings to the AC on changes or amendments to accounting standards to enable the members  of the AC to keep abreast of such changes and its corresponding impact on the financial statements, if any. Directors are also invited to attend relevant seminars  on changes to accounting standards and issues by leading accounting firms.', 'Financial mattersThe AC reviewed the financial statements of the Group before the announcement of the Group’s quarterly and full-year results. In the process, the AC reviewed the key areas of management’s estimates and judgement applied for key financial issues including revenue recognition, taxation, goodwill impairment, and the joint ventures’ and associates’ contingent liabilities, critical accounting policies and any other significant matters that might affect the integrity of the financial statements. The AC also considered the report from the external auditors, including their findings on the key areas of audit focus. Significant matters that were discussed with management, internal and external auditors have been included as key audit matters (KAMs) in the Independent Auditors’ Report for the financial year ended 31 March 2019. Refer to pages 131 to 136 of this Annual Report.', 'The information included in the Annual Report, excluding the Financial Statements and Independent Auditors’ Report, was provided to the external auditors after the Independent Auditors’ Report date. The external auditors have provided a written confirmation to the AC that they have completed the work in accordance with SSA 720 (Revised), The Auditor’s Responsibilities Relating to Other Information, and they have noted no exception. A copy of the charter of the AC is available on the corporate governance page on the Company’s website at www.singtel.com/about-us/company/corporate-governance.', 'Board, Board Committees and Directorsgovernance practices, taking into account relevant local and international developments in the area of corporate governanceof whom, including the chairman, shall be independent. As part of its commitment to gender diversity, the  Board will strive to appoint at least one female Director commentaries on “Board Composition, Diversity and Balance”, “Board Membership” and “Board Performance” from pages 60 to 64.ended 31 March 2019, and also approved various matters by written resolution.', 'The terms of reference of the ERCC provide that the ERCC shall comprise at least three Directors, all of whom shall be non-executive and the majority of whom shall be independent. The ERCC is chaired by an independent non-executive Director. The main responsibilities of the ERCC, as delegated by the Board, are to oversee the remuneration of the Board and Senior Management. It sets appropriate remuneration framework and policies, including long-term incentive schemes, to deliver annual and long-term performance of the Group.', 'The ERCC has been tasked by the Board to approve or recommend to the Board the appointment, promotion and remuneration of Senior Management. The ERCC also recommends the Directors’ compensation for the Board’s endorsement. Directors’ compensation is subject to the approval of shareholders at the AGM. The ERCC’s recommendations cover all aspects of remuneration for Directors and Senior Management, including but not limited to Director’s fees, salaries, allowances, bonuses, options, share-based incentives, management awards, and benefits-in-kind.', 'The ERCC seeks expert advice and views on remuneration and governance matters from both within and outside the Group as appropriate. The ERCC draws on a pool of independent consultants for diversified views and specific expertise. The ERCC will ensure that existing relationships, if any, between the Group and its appointed remuneration consultants will not affect the independence and objectivity of the remuneration consultants.', 'The ERCC also ensures that appropriate recruitment, development and succession planning programmes are in place for key executive roles, with the objective of building strong and sound leadership bench strength for long-term sustainability of the business. The ERCC conducts, on an annual basis, a succession planning review of Senior Management.', 'KEY OBJECTIVESrelation to governance of material risks in the Group’s business, which include ensuring that Management maintains a sound system of risk management and internal controls to safeguard shareholders’ interests and the Group’s assets, and determining the nature and extent of the material risks that the Board is willing to take in achieving the Group’s strategic objectives', 'Management CommitteeIn addition to the five Board Committees and the two advisory bodies, Singtel has a Management Committee that comprises the Group CEO, CEO Group Enterprise, CEO Consumer Australia, CEO Consumer Singapore, CEO International, CEO Group Digital Life, Group Chief Corporate Officer, Group CFO, Group Chief Human Resources Officer, Group Chief Information Officer and Group Chief Technology Officer.', 'Simon Israel – – 3 3 4 4 6 6 – –Chua Sock Koong (2) 5 5 3 3 4 4 6 6 3 3Gautam Banerjee 5 5 – – – – – – 3 3Dominic Barton (3) – – – – – – – – – –Bobby Chin 5 5 – – – – – – 3 3Venky Ganesan – – – – – – 6 6 – –Bradley Horowitz (4) – – – – – – 1 1 – –Gail Kelly (5) – – – – 1 1 – – – –Low Check Kian – – 3 3 – – 6 6 – –Peter Mason AM – – – – 4 4 – – – –Christina Ong 5 5 3 3 – – – – – –Teo Swee Lian – – 3 3 4 4 – – 3 3Peter Ong (6) 2 2 – – – – – – – –', 'Notes:(1) Refers to meetings held/attended while each Director was in office.(2) Ms Chua Sock Koong is not a member of the Board Committees, although she attended meetings of the Committees as appropriate.(3) Mr Dominic Barton was appointed a member of the Finance and Investment Committee and the Risk Committee on 15 May 2019.(4) Mr Bradley Horowitz was appointed a member of the Finance and Investment Committee on 26 December 2018.(5) Mrs Gail Kelly was appointed a member of the Executive Resource and Compensation Committee and the Audit Committee on 26 December 2018 and', 'ACCOUNTABILITY AND AUDIT AccountabilitySingtel recognises the importance of providing the Board with accurate and relevant information on a timely basis. Hence, Board members receive monthly financial and business reports from Management. Such reports compare Singtel’s actual performance against the budget, and highlight key business drivers/indicators and any major issues that are relevant to Singtel’s performance, position and prospects.', 'For the financial year ended 31 March 2019, Singtel’s Group CEO and Group CFO have provided a written confirmation to the Board on the integrity of Singtel’s financial statements and on the adequacy and effectiveness of Singtel’s risk management and internal control systems, addressing financial, operational, compliance and information technology risks. This certification covers Singtel and the subsidiaries that  are under Singtel’s management control.', 'Internal Audit (IA)Singtel IA comprises a team of 63 staff members, including the Group Chief Internal Auditor. Singtel IA reports to the AC functionally and to the Group CEO administratively. Singtel IA is a member of the Singapore chapter of the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) and adopts the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing (the IIA Standards) laid down in the International Professional Practices Framework issued by the IIA.', 'Singtel IA has a Quality Assurance programme to ensure that its audit activities conform to the IIA Standards. As part of the programme, external Quality Assurance Reviews are carried out at least once every three years by qualified professionals from an external organisation. The external Quality Assurance Review was successfully completed in 2018 and continues to meet or exceed the IIA Standards in all key aspects.', 'Singtel IA adopts a risk-based approach in formulating the annual audit plan that aligns its activities to the key strategies and risks across the Group’s business. This plan is reviewed and approved by the AC. The reviews performed by Singtel IA are aimed at assisting the Board in promoting sound risk management, robust internal controls and good corporate governance, through assessing the design and operating effectiveness of controls that govern key business processes and risks identified in the overall risk framework of the Group. Singtel IA’s reviews also focus on compliance with Singtel’s policies, procedures and regulatory responsibilities, performed in the context of financial  and operational, revenue assurance and information systems reviews.', 'Singtel IA works closely with Management in its internal consulting and control advisory role to promote effective risk management, robust internal control and good governance practices in the development of new products/services, and implementation of new/enhanced systems and processes. Singtel IA also collaborates with the internal audit functions of Singtel’s regional associates to promote joint reviews and the sharing of knowledge and/or best practices.', 'External AuditorThe Board is responsible for the initial appointment of external auditor. Shareholders then approve the appointment at Singtel’s AGM. The external auditor holds office until its removal or resignation. The AC assesses the external auditor based on factors such as the performance and quality of its audit and the independence and objectivity of the auditor, and recommends its appointment to the Board.', 'During the year, in line with the Singtel Group policy on periodic review of the appointment of external auditors, the AC has recommended, and the Board has endorsed, the appointment of KPMG as the external auditor for Singtel Group for shareholders’ approval at the 2018 AGM. In recommending the appointment, an audit tender exercise was conducted and proposals were considered against specific evaluation criteria with assigned weights relevant to Singtel Group’s requirements, taking into account relevant guidelines on evaluation of external auditors issued by the Singapore Accounting & Corporate Regulatory Authority (ACRA), Singapore Exchange (SGX) and the Audit Committee Guidance Committee (ACGC) Guidebook. Singtel has complied with Rule 712 and Rule 715 of the SGX Listing Manual in relation to the appointment of its external auditor.', 'In order to maintain the independence of the external auditor, Singtel has developed policies and approval processes regarding the types of non-audit services that the external auditor can provide to the Singtel Group. The AC reviewed the non-audit services provided by the external auditor during the financial year and the associated fees. The AC is satisfied that the independence and objectivity of the external auditor has not been impaired by the provision of those services. The external auditor has also provided confirmation of its independence to the AC.', 'Risk Management and Internal ControlThe Board has overall responsibility for the governance of risk and exercises oversight of the material risks in the Group’s business. During the financial year ended 31 March 2019, the Risk Committee (RC) assisted the Board in the oversight of the Group’s risk profile and policies, adequacy and effectiveness of the Group’s risk management system including the framework and process for the identification and management of significant risks, and reports to the Board on material matters, findings and recommendations pertaining to risk management. The AC provides oversight of the financial reporting risk and the adequacy and effectiveness of the Group’s internal control and compliance systems.', '71control framework is aligned with the ISO 31000:2009 Risk Management framework and the Committee of Sponsoring Organisations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) Internal Controls Integrated Framework.  Major incidents and violations, if any, are reported to  the Board to facilitate the Board’s oversight of the effectiveness of crisis management and the adequacy  of mitigating measures taken by Management to  address the underlying risks.', 'The identification and day-to-day management of  risks rest with Management. Management is responsible for the effective implementation of risk management strategy, policies and processes to facilitate the achievement of business plans and goals within the risk tolerance established by the Board. Key business risks  are proactively identified, addressed and reviewed on  an ongoing basis.', 'The Risk Management Committee, including relevant members from the Senior Management team, is responsible for setting the direction of corporate risk management and monitoring the implementation of risk management policies and procedures including the adequacy of the Group’s insurance programme.  The Risk Management Committee reports to the RC  on a regular basis.', 'The Board has established a Risk Appetite Statement  and Risk Tolerance Framework to provide guidance to  the Management on key risk parameters. The significant risks in the Group’s business, including mitigating measures, were also reviewed by the RC on a regular basis and reported to the Board. Risk registers are maintained by the business and operational units which identify the key risks facing the Group’s business and the internal controls in place to manage those risks. The RC had reviewed the Group’s risk management framework during the reporting period and was satisfied that it continued to be sound.', 'Internal and external auditors conduct audits that involve testing the effectiveness of the material internal control systems within the Singtel Group, relating to financial, operational, compliance and information technology risks. Any material non-compliance or lapses in internal controls are reported to the AC, including the remedial measures recommended to address the risks identified. The AC also reviews the adequacy and timeliness of the actions taken by Management in response to the recommendations made by the internal and external auditors. Control self-assessments in key areas of the Group’s operations are conducted by Management on a periodic basis to evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems, including quarterly and annual certifications by Management to the AC and the Board respectively on the integrity of financial reporting and the adequacy and effectiveness of the risk management, internal control and compliance systems.', 'The Group has put in place a Board Escalation Process where major incidents and violations including major/ material operational loss events and potential breaches of laws and regulations by the Company and/or its key officers, are required to be reported by Management and/or Internal Audit to the Board immediately to facilitate the Board’s oversight of crisis management and adequacy and effectiveness of follow-up actions taken by Management. Through this process, the Board has been kept informed promptly of any incidents with potential material financial, operational, compliance and information technology risk impact.', 'The Board has received assurance from the Group CEO and Group CFO that, as at 31 March 2019, the Group’s  financial records have been properly maintained,  the financial statements give a true and fair view of  the Group’s financial position, operations and performance, and that they are prepared in accordance with accounting standards.', 'Based on the internal controls established and maintained by the Group, work performed by internal and external auditors, reviews performed by Management and the various Board Committees as well as assurances from members of the Management Committee, the Board, with the concurrence of the AC, is of the opinion that the Group’s internal controls and risk management systems were adequate and effective as at 31 March 2019 to address financial, operational, compliance and information', 'The systems of risk management and internal control established by Management provides reasonable, but not absolute, assurance that Singtel will not be adversely affected by any event that can be reasonably foreseen  as it strives to achieve its business objectives. However, the Board also notes that no system of risk management and internal control can provide absolute assurance in  this regard, or absolute assurance against poor judgement in decision-making, human error, losses,  fraud or other irregularities.', 'SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS AND ENGAGEMENT Communication with ShareholdersSingtel is committed to delivering high standards of corporate disclosure and transparency in our communications with shareholders, analysts and other stakeholders in the investment community. Singtel provides timely, regular and relevant information regarding the Group’s strategy, performance and prospects to aid shareholders and investors in their investment decisions.', 'The Singtel Investor Relations (IR) website is a key resource of information for the investment community. It contains a wealth of investor-related information on Singtel, including investor presentations, webcasts of earnings presentations, transcripts of earnings conference calls, annual reports, upcoming events, dividend policy, bond programmes, credit ratings and investor factsheets. Contact details of the IR department are also listed on the website to facilitate dialogue and queries from shareholders.', 'Singtel proactively engages shareholders and the investment community through group and one-on-one meetings, conference calls, email communications, investor conferences and roadshows. This year, Singtel engaged over 500 investors in more than 200 meetings and conference calls in Singapore, London, Taiwan, meetings are largely undertaken by Singtel’s Senior Management, the Chairman and certain Board members also meet with investors.', 'To ensure a two-way flow of information, Singtel commissions an annual survey of investors’ perceptions  to solicit feedback from the investment community  on a range of strategic and topical issues. The survey provides the Singtel Board and Management with invaluable insights into investors’ views of the Group  and helps Singtel identify areas for improvement in investor communication.', 'Shareholder MeetingsSingtel strongly encourages and supports shareholderparticipation at general meetings. Singtel deliversmonth ahead, providing sufficient time for shareholders also advertised in The Straits Times for the benefit ofshareholders. Singtel holds its general meetings atcentral locations in Singapore with convenient access   and pursuant to the Companies Act, the Central Provident Fund Board and relevant intermediaries  (as defined in the Companies Act, Chapter 50) may appoint more than two proxies to attend and vote  on their behalf. A registered shareholder who is not a relevant intermediary may appoint up to two proxies. There are separate resolutions at general meetings  on each substantially separate issue.  Singtel currently', 'At each AGM, the Group CEO delivers a presentation to update shareholders on Singtel’s progress over the past year. Directors and Senior Management are in attendance to address queries and concerns about Singtel. Singtel’s external auditor and counsel also attend to help address shareholders’ queries relating to the conduct of the audit and the auditor’s reports, as well as clarify any points of law, regulation or meeting procedure that may arise. Shareholders are informed of the voting procedures and rules governing the meeting. The minutes of all general meetings are posted on Singtel’s IR website. The minutes disclose the names of the Directors, Senior Management and, where relevant, the external auditor and advisors who attended the meetings, as well as details of the proceedings, including the questions raised by shareholders and the answers given by the Board/Management.', 'Singtel appoints an independent external party as scrutineer for the electronic poll voting process. Prior to the general meeting, the scrutineer will review theproxies and the electronic poll voting system, and attends at the proxy verification process, to ensure that the proxy and poll voting information is compiled correctly. During the general meeting, the scrutineer attends to ensure that the polling process is properly carried out.', 'MANAGING STAKEHOLDER RELATIONSHIPSSingtel undertakes a formal stakeholder engagement exercise, which is facilitated by a third party at least  once every three years to determine the environmental, social and governance issues that are important to the stakeholders. These issues form the materiality matrix upon which targets, metrics, programmes and progress are reviewed by and approved by the Board, before they are published annually in Singtel’s sustainability report. Singtel’s executives are also involved in ongoing engagements with these same stakeholders through various other channels.', 'Singtel’s approach to stakeholder engagement and materiality assessment can be found at page 5 of the Sustainability Report. OTHER MATTERSSecurities TransactionsSingtel has in place a Securities Transactions Policy, which provides that Directors and Top Management members and persons who are in attendance at Board and Top Management meetings (Key Officers) should not deal in Singtel securities during the period commencing two weeks before the announcement of Singtel’s financial statements for each of the first three quarters of the financial year, and during the period commencing one month before the announcement of the financial statements for the full financial year and ending on the date of the announcement of the relevant results. In addition, employees who are involved in the preparation of the Group’s financial statements should not deal in Singtel securities during the period commencing six weeks before the announcement of financial results each quarter. The policy also provides that any of the above persons who is privy to any material unpublished price-sensitive information relating to the Singtel Group should not trade in Singtel securities until the information is appropriately disseminated to the market, regardless of whether or not it is during the abovementioned “closed” periods for trading in Singtel securities. The Company Secretary sends quarterly reminders of the requirements under the policy and the relevant laws and regulations to the Directors and Management.', 'A Director is required to notify Singtel of his interest in Singtel securities within two business days after (a) the date on which he becomes a Director or (b) the date  on which he acquires an interest in Singtel securities.  A Director is also required to notify Singtel of any change', 'The Securities Transactions Policy also discourages trading on short-term considerations and reminds Directors and officers of their obligations under insidertrading laws. Directors and officers of the Group wishing to deal in Singtel securities during a closed period must secure prior written approval of the Chairman (in the case of Directors of Singtel), the Lead Independent Director (in the case of the Chairman) or the Group CEO (in the case of directors of Singtel subsidiaries and Key Officers). Requests for written approval must contain a full explanation of the exceptional circumstances and proposed dealing. If approval is granted, trading must be undertaken in accordance with the limits set out in the written approval. Directors are to inform the Company Secretary before trading in Singtel securities. The Board is kept informed when a Director trades in Singtel securities. A summary of Singtel’s Securities Transactions Policy is available in the Corporate Governance section of the Singtel corporate website.', 'Pursuant to the SGX Listing Manual, the Singtel Group has put in place a policy relating to the maintenance of a list(s) of persons who are privy to price sensitive who are to be included in the privy persons list will be reminded not to trade in Singtel securities while in possession of unpublished price-sensitive information.', 'In relation to the shares of other companies, Directors are prohibited from trading in shares of Singtel’s listed associates when in possession of material price-sensitive information relating to such associates. Directors are also to refrain from having any direct or indirect financial interest in Singtel’s competitors that might or might appear to create a conflict of interest or affect the decisions Directors make on behalf of Singtel.', 'Continuous DisclosureThere are formal policies and procedures to ensure that Singtel complies with its disclosure obligations under the listing rules of the SGX. A Market Disclosure Committee is responsible for Singtel’s Market Disclosure Policy. The policy contains guidelines and procedures for internal reporting and decision-making with regard to the disclosure of material information.', 'No Material ContractsSince the end of the previous financial year ended  31 March 2018, no material contracts involving the interest of the Group CEO, any Director, or the controlling shareholder, Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited, has been entered into by Singtel or any of its subsidiaries, and no such contract subsisted as at 31 March 2019, save', 'Interested Person TransactionsAs required by the SGX Listing Rules, details of interested person transactions (IPT) entered into by the Group are disclosed in this Annual Report on page 250. Singtel Internal Audit regularly reviews the IPT entered into by the Singtel Group to verify the accuracy and completeness of the IPT disclosure and ensure compliance with the SGX reporting requirements under Chapter 9 of the SGX Listing Manual. The report is', 'Codes of Conduct and PracticeThe Board has adopted a Code of Conduct and Ethics as a means to guide the Directors on the areas of ethical risk, and help nurture an environment where integrity and accountability are key. The Code of Conduct and Ethics sets out the Board’s principles on dealing with conflicts of interest, maintaining confidentiality, compliance with laws and regulations and fair dealing. The Board also has a Directors’ Manual, which sets out specific Board governance policies and practices and the Directors’ duties and responsibilities. In addition, Singtel has a code of internal corporate governance practices, policy statements and standards (Singtel Code), and makes this code available to Board members as well as employees of the Group. The principles, policies, standards and practices in the Code of Conduct and Ethics, the Directors’ Manual and the Singtel Code are intended to enhance investor confidence and rapport, and to ensure that decision-making is properly carried out in the best interests of the Group. The Code', 'Singtel also has a strict code of conduct that applies to all employees. The code sets out principles to guide employees in carrying out their duties and responsibilities to the highest standards of personal and corporate integrity when dealing with Singtel, its competitors, customers, suppliers and the community. The code  covers areas such as equal opportunity employment practices, workplace health and safety, conduct in the workplace, business conduct, protection of Singtel’s assets, proprietary information and intellectual property, data protection, confidentiality, conflict of interest, and non-solicitation of customers and employees. Singtel adopts a zero tolerance approach to bribery and corruption in any form and this is set out in the code as well as the Singtel Anti-Bribery and Corruption Policy (ABC Policy). The code and the ABC Policy are posted on Singtel’s internal website and a summarised version of the code, as well as the ABC Policy, are accessible from the Singtel corporate website. Policies and standards are clearly stipulated to guide employees in carrying out their daily tasks.', 'Singtel has established an escalation process so that  the Board of Directors, Senior Management, and internal and external auditors are kept informed of corporate crises in a timely manner, according to their severity.  Such crises may include violations of the code of conduct and/or applicable laws and regulations, as well as loss events that have or are expected to have a significant impact, financial or otherwise, on the Group’s business and operations. Whistle-Blower PolicySingtel undertakes to investigate all complaints of suspected fraud and corruption in an objective manner, and has a whistle-blower policy and procedures that provide employees and external parties with well- defined and accessible channels within the Group. These include a direct channel to Singtel IA and whistle- blower hotline services independently managed by external service providers, for reporting suspected fraud, corruption, unethical practices or other similar matters which may cause financial loss to the Group or damage the Group’s reputation. The policy is aimed at encouraging the reporting of such matters in good faith, with the confidence that employees and other persons making such reports will be treated fairly and, to the extent possible, protected from reprisal.', 'On an ongoing basis, the whistle-blower policy is covered during staff training and periodic communication to all staff as part of the Group’s efforts to promote strong ethical values and fraud and control awareness. All whistle-blower complaints are investigated independently by Singtel IA or an independent investigation committee as appropriate, and the outcome of each investigation is reported to the AC.', 'The ERCC recommends the non-executive Directors’ fees for the Board’s endorsement and approval by shareholders. As Singtel has diverse and complex operations and investments internationally and is not just a Singapore-based company, the fees are benchmarked against fees paid by other comparable companies in Singapore and Australia, as well as comparable companies in other countries.', 'The fees for non-executive Directors (other than the Chairman) comprised a basic retainer fee, additional fees for appointment to Board Committees, attendance fees for ad hoc Board meetings and a travel allowance for Directors who were required to travel out of their country or city of residence to attend Board meetings and Board Committee meetings that did not coincide with Board meetings. The framework for determining non-executive Directors’ fees for the financial year ended 31 March 2019 was the same as the framework for the previous financial year and is set out below:', 'Notes:(1) In addition to the Director’s fees set out above, Mr Simon Israel also received car-related benefits (S$24,557).(2) Mr Dominic Barton was appointed as a Director on 25 March 2019.(3) In addition to the Director’s fees set out above, Mr Venky Ganesan received capacity as the Chairman of the Technology Advisory Panel.(4) Mr Bradley Horowitz was appointed as a Director and a member of the', 'Finance and Investment Committee and the Technology Advisory Panel  on 26 December 2018. In addition to the Director’s fees set out above,  ended 31 March 2019 in his capacity as a member of the Technology Advisory Panel.(5) Mrs Gail Kelly was appointed as a Director and a member of the Executive Resource and Compensation Committee on 26 December 2018. In addition to the Director’s fees set out above, Mrs Gail Kelly received fees of S$25,000 for the financial year ended 31 March 2019 in her capacity as a member of the Optus Advisory Committee.(6) In addition to the Director’s fees set out above, Mr Low Check Kian received fees of S$35,000 for the financial year ended 31 March 2019 in his capacity as a director of Singtel Innov8 Pte. Ltd.(7) In addition to the Director’s fees set out above, Mr Peter Mason AM received fees of S$35,000 for the financial year ended 31 March 2019 in his capacity as a member of the Optus Advisory Committee.(8) Mr Peter Ong stepped down as a Director and member of the Audit Committee and the Risk Committee following the conclusion of the AGM on 24 July 2018.', 'The ERCC recognises that the Group operates in a multinational and multifaceted environment and reviews remuneration through a process that considers Group, business unit and individual performance as well as relevant comparative remuneration in the market. The performance evaluation for Senior Management has been conducted in accordance with the above considerations.', 'During the year, the ERCC engaged Aon Hewitt Singapore Pte Ltd (Aon Hewitt) to provide valuation and vesting computation for grants awarded under the Singtel Performance Share Plan 2012. The ERCC also engaged Willis Towers Watson (Singapore) to conduct Executive Remuneration Benchmarking for Senior Management. Aon Hewitt, Willis Towers Watson and their consultants are independent and not related to the Group or any of its Directors.', 'Policy Performance Bonus Performance Bonus (PB) is designed to support the Group’s business strategy and the ongoing enhancement of shareholder value through the delivery of annual Financial, Strategy, Operational and People objectives. On an individual level, the PB will vary according to the actual achievement against Group, business unit and individual performance objectives.', 'Value Sharing Bonus A portion of Senior Management’s annual remuneration is tied to the Economic Profit (EP) performance of the Group in the form of the Value Sharing Bonus (VSB).  VSB is used to defer their bonuses over a time horizon  to ensure alignment with sustainable value creation for the shareholders over the longer term.', 'Performance LinkagePerformance BonusThe objectives are aligned to the Annual Operating Plan and are different for each executive. They are assessed on the same principles across four broad categories of targets: Financial, Strategy, Operational and People. Weightings are assigned to the targets to encourage a balanced performance and to avoid over-emphasis on any one measure. People targets comprise leadership competencies, core values, people development and staff engagement. In addition, the executives are assessed on teamwork and collaboration across the Group.', 'Value Sharing BonusA “VSB bank” is created for each executive to hold the VSB allocated to him or her in any year. One-third of the “bank” balance would be paid out in cash provided it is positive. The remaining balance will be carried forward and at risk as it is subject to performance-related clawback and could be reduced in the event of EP underperformance in the future years.', 'The long-term incentives consist of two types of awards – the Restricted Share Award (RSA) and the Performance Share Award (PSA) – with grants made at the discretion of the ERCC. The RSA is granted to a broader group of executives while the PSA is granted to Senior and Top Management.', 'PolicyThe number of shares awarded under RSA and PSA is determined using the valuation of the shares based on a Monte-Carlo simulation. The RSA share awards have a service condition, while the PSA share awards are conditional upon the achievement of predetermined performance targets over the performance period. The PSA performance conditions were chosen as they are key drivers of shareholder value creation and aligned to the Group’s business objectives. These performance conditions and targets are approved by the ERCC at the beginning of the performance period.', 'A significant portion of the remuneration package for our Senior Management is delivered in Singtel shares to ensure that their interests are aligned with shareholders. In particular, the long-term incentives mix is more heavily weighted toward PSA for more senior executives to increase focus on shareholder returns. This is further supported by significant shareholding requirements in which they are required to build up and retain at least the equivalent of two times their annual base salary in shares. Group CEO is expected to hold at least the equivalent of three times her annual base salary as shareholding.', 'Special provisions for vesting and lapsing of awards apply for events such as the termination of employment, misconduct, retirement and any other events approved the ERCC will consider, at its discretion, whether or not to release any award, and will take into account circumstances on a case-by-case basis, including (but not limited to) the contributions made by the employee. Singtel employees are prohibited from entering into transactions in associated products which limit the economic risk of participating in unvested awards  under Singtel’s equity-based remuneration schemes.', 'Performance LinkageRestricted Share Award (RSA)The RSA has a two-year performance period from  1 April 2019 to 31 March 2021. 50% of the 2019 RSA will vest two years from grant date and 50% will vest three years from grant date, subject to the following conditions:financial year preceding each tranche of vesting.', 'Notes:(1) Fixed Remuneration refers to base salary earned for the financial year ended 31 March 2019.(2) Variable Bonus comprises Performance Bonus (PB) and Value Sharing Bonus (VSB). PB varies according to the actual achievement against Group, business unit and individual performance objectives for the year. VSB is awarded for individual performance and Group Economic Profit (EP) performance for the year. The allocated VSB will be credited into the VSB ‘bank’ and one-third of the ‘bank’ balance is paid out in cash each year provided it is positive. The remaining balance is carried forward to the next year and at risk as it is subject to a clawback feature. For more details, please refer to pages 79 to 80. Variable Bonus Earned is the sum of PB and VSB awarded for the financial year ended 31 March 2019. Variable Bonus Paid Out is the sum of PB and VSB paid out in June 2019.', '81(3) Provident Fund in Singapore represents payments in respect of company statutory contributions to the Singapore Central Provident Fund.(4) Benefits are stated on the basis of direct costs to the company and include car benefits, flexible benefits and other non-cash benefits such as medical cover and club membership.(5) Total Cash & Benefits Earned is the sum of Fixed Remuneration, Provident Fund, Benefits and Variable Bonus awarded for the financial year ended', '31 March 2019. Total Cash & Benefits Paid Out is the sum of Fixed Remuneration, Provident Fund, Benefits and Variable Bonus paid out for the financial year ended 31  March 2019.(6) Long-term Incentives are awarded in the form of Restricted Share Award (RSA) and Performance Share Award (PSA) under the Singtel Performance Share Plan 2012.(7) The second tranche of the vested 2017 RSA will be released in June 2020, subject to continued service of the employee.(8) The vesting of the RSA and PSA are conditional upon the achievement of predetermined performance targets or vesting conditions over the respective performance period, which are a two-year period for RSA and a three-year period for PSA.(9) The 2019 grants of RSA and PSA were made in June 2019 for performance for the financial year ended 31 March 2019. The per unit fair values of the RSA and', 'Notes:(1) Fixed Remuneration refers to base salary earned for the financial year ended 31 March 2019.(2) Variable Bonus comprises Performance Bonus (PB) and Value Sharing Bonus (VSB). PB varies according to the actual achievement against Group, business unit and individual performance objectives for the year. VSB is awarded for individual performance and Group Economic Profit (EP) performance for the year. The allocated VSB will be credited into the VSB ‘bank’ and one-third of the ‘bank’ balance is paid out in cash each year provided it is positive. The remaining balance is carried forward to the next year and at risk as it is subject to a clawback feature. For more details, please refer to pages 79 to 80. Variable Bonus Earned is the sum of PB and VSB awarded for the financial year ended 31 March 2019. Variable Bonus Paid Out is the sum of PB and VSB paid out in June 2019. (3) Provident Fund in Singapore represents payments in respect of company contributions to the Singapore Central Provident Fund.(4) Benefits are stated on the basis of direct costs to the company and include overseas assignment benefits, tax equalisation, car benefits, flexible benefits and other non-cash benefits such as medical cover and club membership, where applicable.(5) Total Cash & Benefits Earned is the sum of Fixed Remuneration, Provident Fund, Benefits and Variable Bonus awarded for the financial year ended 31 March 2019.', 'Total Cash & Benefits Paid Out is the sum of Fixed Remuneration, Provident Fund, Benefits and Variable Bonus paid out for the financial year ended 31 March 2019.(6) Long-term Incentives are awarded in the form of performance shares. Grants of the Restricted Share Award (RSA) and Performance Share Award (PSA) under the Singtel Performance Share Plan 2012 were made in June 2019 for performance for the financial year ended 31 March 2019. The per unit fair values of the RSA and PSA are S$2.644 and S$1.556 respectively. (7) Benefits for Mr Hui Weng Cheong include tax equalisation in relation to his assignment to AIS, Thailand.(8) All remuneration items for Mr Allen Lew are denominated in Australian Dollar, except for his Provident Fund, which is denominated in Singapore Dollar.(9) The second tranche of the vested 2017 RSA will be released in June 2020, subject to continued service of the employee.(10) The vesting of the RSA and PSA are conditional upon the achievement of predetermined performance targets or vesting conditions over the respective performance period, which are a two-year period for RSA and a three-year period for PSA.', 'Summary of Disclosures – Corporate GovernanceRule 710 of the SGX Listing Manual requires Singapore listed companies to describe their corporate governance practices with specific reference to the 2018 Code in their annual reports for financial years commencing on or after 1 January 2019. As we have elected to adopt Rule 710 of the SGX Listing Manual in advance, this summary of disclosures describes our corporate governance practices with specific reference to the express disclosure requirements in the principles and provisions of the 2018', 'Provision 8.1The Company discloses the policy and criteria for setting remuneration, as well as names, amounts and breakdown of remuneration of (a) each individual director and the CEO; and (b) at least the top five key management personnel (who are not Directors or the CEO) in bands no wider than S$250,000 and in aggregate the total remuneration  paid to these key management personnel.', 'Provision 8.2company, or are immediate family members of a Director, the CEO or a substantial shareholder of the company, and whose remuneration exceeds S$100,000 during the year, in bands no wider than S$100,000. The disclosure states clearly the employee’s relationship with the relevant director or the CEO or substantial shareholder.', 'Provision 9.2Whether the Board has received assurance from (a) the CEO and the CFO that the financial records have been properly maintained and the financial statements give true and fair view of the Company’s operations and finances; and (b) the CEO and the other key management personnel who are responsible, regarding the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company’s risk management and internal control systems.', 'PROACTIVE AND OPEN COMMUNICATION WITH THE INVESTMENT COMMUNITYDuring the financial year ended 31 March 2019, the management and Investor Relations (IR) team engaged more than 500 investors in over 200 meetings and conference calls to discuss the Group’s business strategy and operational and financial performance. We also participated in local and overseas investor conferences and roadshows in Europe, Canada, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Taiwan and the US.', 'We are focused on helping investors understand how the Group is creating sustainable competitive advantages through investments in digital businesses, network and content, as well as building digital ecosystems in payments, gaming and esports. In addition, we share with investors how the use of technology is lifting efficiency, supporting new automation in work processes and improving our cost base. To give investors a first-hand experience of cutting-edge technologies like IoT, data analytics and advanced networks, we organised regular tours of our business facilities, including our FutureNow Innovation Centre and the revamped Singtel flagship store.', 'Our annual Singtel Investor Day in June 2018 attracted over 70 participants. Investors and analysts interacted directly with the senior management of Singtel, Optus and our associates through small group presentations and a Q&A session.  We also showcased our digital services, including a simulation of future 5G solutions. Singtel Innov8, our venture capital fund, arranged for investee companies to present insights into technologies such as aerial drones and robotic process automation.', 'Retail investors are an important  part of our outreach efforts. We have been a long-term sponsor of the Securities Investors Association (Singapore) (SIAS) Investor Education Programme and leverage the annual Singtel-SIAS dialogue to communicate our strategy and performance with retail shareholders. Retail investors are welcome to contact us directly through email or telephone.', 'MAINTAIN LEAD IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE, TRANSPARENCY AND INVESTOR RELATIONSWe continue to nurture and maintain strong links with sell-side research analysts and are well-covered by more than 20 analysts, based in Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, India and the UK, who issue regular reports. We monitor analyst, industry and media reports closely, as part of our efforts to continuously improve disclosures and IR practices.', 'Each year, we commission an independent study to gather investor perceptions of our business. The study, comprising in-depth interviews with approximately 60 institutional investors and research analysts, gives our Board and management a better understanding of investors’ views and concerns. It also helps the IR team identify areas of investor focus, enabling us to tailor our communications and disclosures accordingly. The latest study highlighted the challenges facing the telco industry but respondents drew assurance from Singtel’s clear strategy and strong management team.', 'We proactively engage investors to understand their views on sustainability and how it influences their investment decisions. We are providing more disclosures on our sustainability initiatives and helping investors understand our material issues, policies and efforts in areas such as the environment and climate change, data protection, supply chain, social matters and human rights. We have endorsed the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures’ voluntary framework and are working towards meeting its standards.', 'The Singtel IR website is the primary source of corporate information, financial data and significant business developments for the investment community. All new, material announcements are made available on the IR website immediately after they are released to the Singapore Exchange to ensure fair, equal and prompt dissemination of information. In addition, we constantly review the level of disclosure, to align it with global best practices and take into account new business initiatives. Information on Singtel’s credit ratings and bond programmes were added during the financial year.', 'During our quarterly earnings announcements, we provide  extensive information, including detailed financial statements, management discussion and analyses and presentation slides. Our management responds to questions from investors and analysts over a conference call on the day of the results announcement and a transcript of the conference call is posted on the Singtel IR website the next work day.', 'Our efforts have not gone unnoticed, as we continue to be acknowledged globally in areas such as diversity, governance and climate change. In 2018, we were recognised by awards and indices including ASEAN’s Top 5 and Singapore’s Top 3 Publicly Listed Companies at the 2nd ASEAN Corporate Governance Awards, Best Strategy and Sustainability Management and Best Climate Change at the Sustainable Business Awards Singapore 2018, 2019 Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index and FTSE4Good Index for our sustainability initiatives.', 'Environmental issues have heightened in recent years as the impact of climate change becomes more evident. We believe that everyone, from governments and companies to the person on the street, has a responsibility to tackle climate change through mitigation and adaptation efforts. At Singtel, we aim to do our part by leaving the smallest environmental footprint, even as our business continues to expand.', 'SETTING THE CLIMATE AGENDA FROM THE TOPSingtel is taking a regional leadership role to steer the industry towards tackling climate change. We have set science-based carbon targets to serve as a guide for all of our business activities. For instance, we are searching for renewable energy sources to help us achieve and exceed our carbon reduction targets approved by the Science Based Targets initiative. Last year, we also pledged to support 2018 as the Year of Climate Action for Singapore. In Australia, we continue to play an active role in the Australian Business Roundtable for Disaster Resilience and Safer Communities, collaborating with diverse stakeholders in Australia', 'MINIMISING THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF OUR PRODUCTSAs a leading communications technology company, we are committed to minimising e-waste, such as metals, plastics and batteries from mobile phones, that have the potential to be pollutive. Our ongoing efforts such as ReCYCLE in Singapore and Mobile Muster in Australia have been well-received by customers and staff and collection rates continue to grow yearly.', 'NURTURING OUR PEOPLE TO POWER OUR FUTURE Our people are our most important asset and we ensure that they are equipped with the relevant skills to navigate a fast-changing global landscape. We take a proactive approach to the future of work as we recognise the huge impact on business from rapid digitisation. Hence, we continue to improve the digital literacy and capabilities of our people through various training initiatives. By grooming a digital workforce and workplace, we enhance our employee experience and drive Singtel’s overall digital transformation.', 'ATTRACTING AND RETAINING TALENTWe have ramped up our efforts to attract digitally-savvy candidates to ensure we remain relevant in the new economy. Part of this effort involves promoting Singtel’s thought leadership in the areas of digital transformation journey and employer value proposition at recruitment events. We also launched a new Digital Leadership Experience programme in FY 2019 to develop leaders of digital businesses.', 'GENDER DIVERSITY AND INCLUSIONWe strongly believe that diversity in the workplace is a key competitive advantage for us, providing a broad range of insights and opinions reflective of the diverse markets we operate in. To foster such diversity, we are committed to increasing the representation of women in senior leadership and technical roles. Singtel was one of only four Singapore companies and the only Southeast Asian communications company to be recognised for our gender diversity efforts when we were listed in the 2019 Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index. We were also part of the Thomson Reuters  IX Global Diversity and Inclusion Index 2018.', 'As a leading communications group, we are well-positioned to play a significant role in supporting the inclusion and progress of society’s more vulnerable segments. By leveraging our technologies and programmes, we aim to improve the well-being of vulnerable groups while helping them realise their potential. We also invest directly in the communities we operate in as part of our sustainability strategy. Through these efforts, Singtel strives to be a responsible corporate citizen that is a force for positive change in society.', 'PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES THROUGH EDUCATION AND EMPLOYABILITYThrough various partnerships and programmes, we equip youth with disabilities with the skills they need to enter the workforce and lead independent lives. One of our key initiatives in this effort is the Singtel Touching Lives Fund, our flagship corporate philanthropy programme which raises funds for six schools that provide educational support for youth with special needs in Singapore. Another of our initiatives, the Singtel Enabling', 'Our employees can volunteer their time and talent for a range of social and environmental causes, such as the annual Singtel Carnival – Singapore’s largest event dedicated to children with special needs. In Australia, our online portal Yes4Good allows our people to donate, sign up to volunteer and fundraise for their favourite causes. Meanwhile, Better Together – our annual overseas volunteering programme with our associates – organised three expeditions in 2018 to India, the Philippines and Thailand.', 'INCLUSION AND WELL-BEINGOne key focus of our community strategy involves supporting the cancer cause. Given its pervasiveness in society, we strongly believe that everyone affected by cancer should have access to care regardless of their social or financial status. To this end, we continue to support and participate in initiatives such as the Singtel-Singapore Cancer Society Race Against Cancer, an event that aims to raise funds to drive Singapore Cancer Society programmes. In Australia, Optus employees continue to participate in the Tour de Cure to raise awareness and funds towards cancer research and prevention.', 'The Singtel Group is committed to ethical and responsible business practices, which extend to our supply chain as well. During the year, Australia introduced a new Modern Slavery Legislation, which we will be using to update our Supplier Code of Conduct, Supplier Risk Assessment Questionnaires, Supplier Service Agreements and engagement process to ensure that our supply chain operates at the highest level of human and labour rights as well as environmental practices.', 'In 2018, the third instalment of the annual programme held in Sydney, Australia attracted over 3,000 applicants from Singapore, Australia, Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia. 48 selected start-ups received more than S$1 million in funding and support, and were advised by volunteer teams of Singtel experts and partners from the social and private sectors on their technology solutions and business models.', 'Notes:(1) Please refer to the Singtel Group Sustainability Report for the reporting scope of environmental indicators.(2)  Water use for Optus Sydney Campus only.(3)  Data covers waste directly managed by Optus’ contracted waste vendor.(4)  Workplace safety and health metrics based on International Labour Organization (ILO) definitions.(5)  Restated.(6)  Community investment has been verified by The London Benchmarking Group (LBG).', 'Share of associates’ pre-tax profits 1,536 2,461 2,461 2,886 2,791 2,579Group EBITDA and share of associates’ pre-tax profits 6,228  7,511 7,550 7,884 7,804 7,670 Group EBIT 4,006  5,261 5,210 5,645 5,655 5,508 Net profit (2) 3,095 5,473 5,451 3,853 3,871 3,782Underlying net profit (3) 2,825 3,593 3,544 3,871 3,805 3,779Exchange rate (A$ against S$) (4) 0.990 1.049 1.049 1.043 1.020 1.123', 'Cash Flow (S$ million)Group free cash flow (5) 3,650 3,606 3,606 3,054 2,718 3,549 Singtel 1,242 1,126 1,126 1,040 869 1,379 Optus 1,006 989 989 514 631 1,070 Optus (A$ million) 1,028 947 947 500 617 976 Associates’ dividends (net of withholding tax) 1,402 1,492 1,492 1,500 1,218 1,100Cash capital expenditure 1,718 2,349 2,349 2,261 1,930 2,238', 'Key RatiosProportionate EBITDA from outside Singapore (%) 76 76 77 75 74 74 Return on invested capital (6) (%) 7.7 9.6 9.5 10.9 11.7 12.1 Return on equity (2) (%) 10.4 18.9 18.8 14.5 15.6 15.6 Return on total assets (2) (%) 6.3 11.2 11.2 8.3 9.0 9.3 Net debt to EBITDA and share of associates’   pre-tax profits (number of times) 1.6 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.2 1.0 EBITDA and share of associates’ pre-tax profits   to net interest expense (number of times) 16.2 20.1 20.2 23.4 25.3 29.2', 'Per Share Information (S cents)Earnings per share - basic (2) 18.96 33.53 33.40 23.96 24.29 23.73Earnings per share - underlying net profit (3) 17.31 22.01 21.71 24.07 23.88 23.71Net assets per share 183 182 182 173 157 155Dividend per share - ordinary 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5 17.5Dividend per share - special - 3.0 3.0 - - -‘’Singtel’’ refers to Singtel Group excluding Optus.', 'Notes:(1)  Based on Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (International). (2)  FY 2018 included the gain on disposal of economic interest in NetLink Trust of S$2.03 billion.(3)  Underlying net profit is defined as net profit before exceptional items. (4)  Average A$ rate for translation of Optus’ operating revenue.(5)  Free cash flow refers to cash flow from operating activities, including dividends from associates, less cash capital expenditure. (6)  Return on invested capital is defined as EBIT (post-tax) divided by average capital.', 'FY 2019The Group has executed well on its strategy amid challenging conditions and gained market share in mobile across both Singapore and Australia. Operating revenue was stable at S$17.37 billion while EBITDA declined 7.1% to S$4.69 billion due partly to a 6% depreciation in the Australian Dollar. In constant currency terms, operating revenue grew 3.7% driven mainly by increases in ICT, digital services and equipment sales. However, EBITDA was down 3.9% mainly due to lower legacy carriage services especially voice, and price erosion.', 'The associates’ pre-tax contributions declined a steep 38% to S$1.54 billion mainly driven by operating losses at Airtel and lower contribution from Telkomsel amid aggressive price competition in India and Indonesia. The decline was partly mitigated by double-digit profit growth at Globe with robust revenue growth in mobile and broadband.', 'FY 2018The Group delivered record earnings for FY 2018 with net profit of S$5.45 billion bolstered by exceptional gain of S$2.03 billion from the divestment of units in NetLink Trust and a strong core performance. Operating revenue was S$17.53 billion, 4.9% higher than FY 2017, while EBITDA rose 1.8% to S$5.09 billion reflecting strong customer gains in Australia and first time contribution from Turn (acquired by Amobee in April 2017). In constant currency terms, operating revenue and EBITDA increased by 4.7% and 1.5% respectively.', 'The associates’ pre-tax contributions declined 15% to S$2.46 billion on weaker earnings from Airtel India and Telkomsel impacted by intense competition and mandated reduction in mobile termination charges in India, as well as lower contribution from NetLink NBN Trust following the reduction in economic interest of 75.2% in July 2017. The decline was partly mitigated by higher contribution from Intouch (acquired in November 2016).', 'FY 2017The Group delivered resilient earnings amid heightened competition across all the markets the Group operated in. Operating revenue was S$16.71 billion, 1.5% lower than  FY 2016 but would have increased 2.0% excluding the impact of regulatory mobile termination rates change in Australia from 1 January 2016. EBITDA remained stable at S$5.0 billion. The Australian Dollar appreciated 2% against the Singapore Dollar. In constant currency terms, operating revenue and EBITDA decreased by 2.6% and 1.5% respectively.', 'The associates’ pre-tax contributions rose 5.4% to  S$2.94 billion despite weakness in Airtel which faced intense price competition in India. Strong growth at Telkomsel and NetLink Trust, as well as first time contribution from Intouch (acquired in November 2016) was partly offset by lower profits at Airtel, AIS and Globe.', 'Group Five-year Financial SummaryFY 2016The Group delivered a strong performance with resilient core business and robust contributions from associates. Operating revenue was S$16.96 billion, 1.5% lower than FY 2015 with the Australian Dollar declining a steep 9% against the Singapore Dollar and the impact of lower mobile termination rates in Australia from 1 January 2016. In constant currency terms, operating revenue would have grown 4.1% across all business units with first time contribution from Trustwave, Inc. (a newly acquired cyber security business). EBITDA was S$5.01 billion, 1.5% lower than FY 2015 and in constant currency terms, would have increased 4.1% with strong cost management.', 'FY 2015The Group delivered a strong set of results. Operating revenue was S$17.22 billion, 2.2% higher than FY 2014  with growth across all the business units. EBITDA was S$5.09 billion, 1.3% lower than FY 2014 with the Australian Dollar weakening 4% against the Singapore Dollar. In constant currency terms, revenue grew 4.8% and EBITDA rose 1.3% despite operating losses from the digital businesses.', 'The associates’ pre-tax contributions rose 8.2% to  S$2.79 billion and would have increased 9.7% excluding the currency translation impact. The regional associates recorded strong customer growth and robust mobile data growth, with higher earnings from Telkomsel and Globe offsetting the decline in Airtel.  Underlying net profit was stable and net profit including exceptional items increased 2.4% to S$3.87 billion. In constant currency terms, underlying net profit and net profit would have increased 4.0% and 5.5% respectively from FY 2015.', 'Share of associates’ post-tax profits  1,383  1,823 -24.1 -21.8Notes:(1)  Assuming constant exchange rates for the Australian Dollar, United States Dollar and/or regional currencies (Indian Rupee, Indonesian Rupiah, Philippine Peso and Thai Baht) from the previous year ended 31 March 2018 (FY 2018). (2) Underlying net profit refers to net profit before exceptional items.', 'The Group has executed well on its strategy amid challenging industry, business and economic conditions. The fundamentals of the core businesses remained strong and the Group gained market share in mobile across both Singapore and Australia led by product innovations, content and services. Amobee and Trustwave continued to scale and deepen their capabilities, while the regional associates further monetised the growth in data as smartphone adoption increased. Leveraging on the Group’s strengths and customer base, Singtel continued to build  digital ecosystems in payments, gaming and esports.', 'In constant currency terms, operating revenue grew 3.7% driven by increases in ICT, digital services and equipment sales. However, EBITDA was down  3.9% mainly due to lower legacy carriage services especially voice, and price erosion. With 6% depreciation in the Australian Dollar, operating revenue was stable while EBITDA declined 7.1%.', 'In the emerging markets, the regional associates continued to invest in network, spectrum and content to drive data usage. Pre-tax contributions from the associates declined a steep 38% mainly due to Airtel and Telkomsel, the Group’s two largest regional associates. Airtel recorded operating losses on sustained pricing pressures in the Indian mobile market. Telkomsel’s earnings fell on lower revenue due to fierce competition in Indonesia in the earlier part of the financial year when the mandatory SIM card registration exercise took effect. Including associates’ contributions, the Group’s EBIT was S$4.01 billion, down 24% from last year.', 'With lower contributions from the associates, underlying net profit declined by 21%. Exceptional gain was lower as FY 2018 was boosted by a S$2.03 billion of gain on the divestment of units in NetLink Trust. Consequently, the Group recorded  a net profit of S$3.10 billion, down  44% from last year.', 'GROUP CONSUMERIn Australia, operating revenue grew 7.4% despite heightened competition. The increase was driven mainly by higher equipment sales and handset leasing, and customer growth with record net additions of 454,000 branded postpaid handset customers for the year. Mobile service revenue was stable as postpaid customer gains was negated by ARPU decline amid intense data price competition. Mass Market Fixed revenue remained stable with higher off-net revenue, driven by NBN customer growth of 137,000 from a year ago, offset by lower on-net revenue. NBN migration revenues fell 3.6%,  hit by the temporary suspension in the rollout of HFC services over the NBN during the financial year. EBITDA was stable but would have grown 2.6% excluding NBN migration revenues and dispute settlement recorded in FY 2018.', 'GROUP ENTERPRISEOperating revenue slid 2.3% impacted by price competition and longer sales cycle in a cautious trading environment, particularly in Australia. Revenue would have been stable in constant currency terms with growth in ICT offset by decline in legacy carriage services especially voice. ICT revenue, which constituted 48% (FY 2018: 46%) of Group Enterprise’s revenue, grew 2.1% in constant currency terms. The growth was driven by cyber security, cloud and digital services, which in total contributed approximately  S$1.3 billion in revenue, up 15%  from last year. EBITDA however declined 9.0% mainly from price erosions on renewals of major public sector ICT contracts, lower voice revenues and investments in digitalisation initiatives. Including higher depreciation charges from investments in network, data centres and project related capital spending, EBIT fell 14%.', 'GROUP DIGITAL LIFEGroup Digital Life posted robust revenue growth of 13% to S$1.22 billion from digital marketing arm Amobee and video-on-demand streaming service HOOQ. Amobee’s revenue rose 12% fuelled by growth in its programmatic advertising business, and contributions from Videology assets (platform for advanced TV and video advertising acquired in August 2018) and first time recognition of technology licence fees from ITV plc, which mitigated the decline in its managed media business. HOOQ’s revenue more than doubled, boosted by growth in paying subscribers and increased scale. Group Digital Life’s negative EBITDA increased due mainly to Amobee’s lower revenue from its higher-margin media business and inclusion of Videology’s losses.', 'Share of post-tax profits  Telkomsel   843   1,031 -18.3 -12.4 AIS   286  292 -1.7 -3.9 Globe (3)       - ordinary results 251   180  39.3 45.3 - exceptional items  -  22 nm nm  251    202  23.9 29.1 Intouch (3) (4)       - operating results  101  106 -4.4 -6.5 - amortisation of acquired intangibles  (22)  (21) 8.3 5.9  79  86 -7.5 -9.5 Airtel (3)  (131)  101 nm nm BTL (5)  (40)  (18) 127.8 140.9 (171)  83 nm nm Regional associates (3)  1,287  1,694 -24.0 -21.5 NetLink NBN Trust/ NetLink Trust (6) 48 72 -32.9 -32.9 Other associates (3) (7) 47 57 -17.6 -17.6', 'Notes:(1)  Based on Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (International). (2) Assuming constant exchange rates for the regional currencies (Indian Rupee, Indonesian Rupiah, Philippine Peso and Thai Baht) from FY 2018. (3) Share of results excluded the Group’s share of the associates’ significant one-off items which have been classified as exceptional items of the Group. (4) Singtel holds an equity interest of 21.0% in Intouch which has an equity interest of 40.5% in AIS. (5) Bharti Telecom Limited (BTL) holds an equity interest of 50.1% in Airtel as at 31 March 2019.  In BTL’s standalone books, its loss comprised mainly interest charges on its borrowings.  (6) Singtel ceased to own units in NetLink Trust following the sale to NetLink NBN Trust in July 2017 but continues to have an interest of 24.8% in NetLink NBN Trust,  the holding company of NetLink Trust. The share of results included Singtel’s amortisation of deferred gain of S$20 million (FY 2018: S$32 million) on assets previously transferred to NetLink Trust, but excluded the fair value adjustments recorded by NetLink NBN Trust in respect of its acquisition of units in NetLink Trust. (7)  Include the share of results of Singapore Post Limited.', 'The Group’s combined mobile customer base reached 692 million, down 14 million from a year ago on declines in Indonesia and India.  Telkomsel’s revenue fell 4% due to the steep 24% decline in traditional voice and SMS revenues on increased popularity of OTT apps and higher smartphone penetration. The decline was partly mitigated by 21% growth in data and digital services as Telkomsel’s digital businesses gained traction. EBITDA fell 9% on lower revenue and higher network expenses from the accelerated deployment of its 4G network. With a weaker Indonesian Rupiah, Telkomsel’s  post-tax contribution declined 18%.  Its mobile customer base was impacted by churn due to the SIM card registration exercise.', 'AIS’ service revenue (excluding interconnect and equipment rental) grew 1%. The increase was driven by higher fixed broadband revenue and the consolidation of CS Loxinfo acquired in January 2018, partly offset by decline in mobile revenue due to intense price competition. EBITDA rose 3% on revenue growth and lower marketing spend. Including higher depreciation charges from', 'Globe delivered a solid performance with double-digit growth in EBITDA and earnings. Service revenue grew 6% driven by robust data growth in mobile and broadband. EBITDA rose 22% on strong revenue growth and lower selling expenses. Despite higher depreciation charges and share of equity losses from its associates, Globe’s post-tax ordinary contribution rose strongly by 39%. The share of Globe’s one-off gain in FY 2018 arose from the increase in fair value of its retained interest in its associate. With the absence of exceptional gain this year, overall post-tax contribution grew 24%.', 'The Group’s share of Airtel’s post-tax loss (excluding its net exceptional gain) was S$131 million, compared to the share of post-tax profit of  S$101 million in FY 2018. The losses were mainly due to a steep decline in ARPU on disruptive price competition. Airtel Africa reported strong growth in operating revenue and EBITDA. Airtel’s total mobile customers declined mainly from India due to implementation of minimum recharge plans.', 'Airtel recorded some one-off  items in the current year which  have been classified as exceptional items of the Group. The exceptional items comprised mainly fair value gains on deconsolidation of a subsidiary and write-back of accruals on re-assessment of levies partly  offset by other charges. Including  the share of Airtel’s net exceptional gain of S$206 million, overall contribution from Airtel and BTL  was a net profit of S$34 million,  down 53% from last year.', 'Mobile customers (‘000) - Aggregate 168,642  41,491 384,078  83,490 - Proportionate 59,025  9,676 144,770  39,307 Growth in mobile customers (3) (%) -13% 3.6% -2.9% 32%Notes:(1)  Mobile penetration rate, market share and market position pertained to India market only. (2) Based on number of mobile customers.(3) Compared against 31 March 2018 and based on aggregate mobile customers.', 'Singtel received proceeds of  S$118 million from the disposal of a property in Singapore. Payments of S$123 million were made for the acquisition of Videology assets in August 2018 and S$344 million for the acquisition of a 5.7% equity interest in Airtel Africa in October 2018. Capital expenditure totalled S$1.72 billion, comprising S$587 million for Singtel and S$1.13 billion (A$1.14 billion) for Optus. In Singtel, major capital investments in the year included S$215 million for fixed and data infrastructure, S$183 million for mobile networks and S$189 million for ICT and other investments.', 'Net cash outflow for financing activities amounted to S$3.06 billion. Major cash outflows included net interest payments of S$385 million, and payments of S$1.75 billion for final dividends in respect of  FY 2018 and S$1.11 billion for interim dividends in respect of FY 2019, partly offset by increase in net borrowings of S$222 million.', 'Share capital  4,127  4,127 Retained earnings  27,513  27,269 Currency translation reserve (1)  (1,768)  (1,284)Other reserves  (35)  (376) Equity attributable to shareholders 29,838 29,737 Non-controlling interests and other reserve  (28)  (26) Total equity 29,810 29,712 Note:(1)  ‘Currency translation reserve’ relates mainly to the translation of the net assets of foreign subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures of the Group denominated mainly in Australian Dollar, Indian Rupee, Indonesian Rupiah, Philippine Peso, Thai Baht and United States Dollar.', 'Gross debt (S$ million) 10,396 10,402Net debt (1) (S$ million) 9,883 9,877Net debt gearing ratio (2) (%) 24.9 24.9Net debt to EBITDA and share of associates’ pre-tax profits (number of times) 1.6 1.3Interest cover (3) (number of times) 16.2 20.1Notes:(1) Net debt is defined as gross debt less cash and bank balances adjusted for related hedging balances.(2) Net debt gearing ratio is defined as the ratio of net debt to net capitalisation. Net capitalisation is the aggregate of net debt, shareholders’ funds and  non-controlling interests.(3) Interest cover refers to the ratio of EBITDA and share of associates’ pre-tax profits to net interest expense.', 'OUTLOOK FOR THE NEXT FINANCIAL YEAR ENDING  31 MARCH 2020For the Group’s outlook for the next financial year ending 31 March 2020, proposed final dividend, was  17.5 cents per share or 101% of the Group’s underlying net profit and  88% of the Group’s free cash flow (after interest and tax payments).', 'Singtel is committed to delivering dividends that increase over time with growth in underlying earnings, while maintaining an optimal capital structure and investment grade credit ratings. Barring unforeseen circumstances, it expects to maintain its ordinary dividends at 17.5 cents per share for the next financial year ending 31 March 2020.please refer to pages 9 to 10 of  the Management Discussion and  Analysis for the fourth quarter  and year ended 31 March 2019 announced on 15 May 2019.', 'In the opinion of the Directors,(a) the consolidated financial statements of the Group and the statement of financial position and statement of changes in equity of the Company as set out on pages 137 to 249 are drawn up so as to give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group and of the Company as at 31 March 2019, and the financial performance, changes in equity and cash flows of the Group and changes in equity of the Company for the financial year ended on  that date; and(b) at the date of this statement, there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Company will be able to pay its debts as and when they fall due.', 'Simon Claude Israel (Chairman) Chua Sock Koong (Group Chief Executive Officer) Gautam Banerjee Dominic Stephen Barton (appointed on 25 March 2019)Bobby Chin Yoke Choong Venkataraman Vishnampet GanesanBradley Joseph Horowitz (appointed on 26 December 2018)Gail Patricia Kelly (appointed on 26 December 2018)Low Check Kian Peter Edward Mason AM (1) Christina Hon Kwee Fong (Christina Ong)Teo Swee Lian  Peter Ong Boon Kwee, who served during the financial year, stepped down as a Director of the Company following the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting on 24 July 2018. Note: (1) Member of the Order of Australia', '2. ARRANGEMENTS TO ENABLE DIRECTORS TO ACQUIRE BENEFITS BY MEANS OF THE ACQUISITION OF  SHARES AND DEBENTURES Neither at the end of nor at any time during the financial year was the Company a party to any arrangement whose object is to enable the Directors of the Company to acquire benefits by means of the acquisition of shares in, or debentures of, the Company or any other body corporate, except for performance shares granted under the Singtel Performance Share Plan 2012 (the “Singtel PSP 2012”) and share options granted by Amobee Group  Pte. Ltd. (“Amobee”).', '3. DIRECTORS’ INTERESTS IN SHARES AND DEBENTURES  The interests of the Directors holding office at the end of the financial year in the share capital of the Company  and related corporations according to the register of Directors’ shareholdings kept by the Company under  Section 164 of the Singapore Companies Act were as follows –', 'Singapore Telecommunications Limited(Ordinary shares)Simon Claude Israel 1,019,593 (1) 919,961 1,360 (2) 1,360Chua Sock Koong 8,229,844 (3) 7,540,668 4,104,371 (4) 4,852,449Gautam Banerjee - - - -Dominic Stephen Barton - - - -Bobby Chin Yoke Choong - - - -Bradley Joseph Horowitz - - - -Gail Patricia Kelly - - - -Low Check Kian 1,490 1,490 - -Peter Edward Mason AM 50,000 (5) 50,000 - -Christina Ong - - - -Teo Swee Lian 1,550 1,550 - -(American Depositary Shares)Venkataraman Vishnampet Ganesan 3,341.45 (6) 3,341.45 - -', 'Notes:(1) 1,015,182 ordinary shares held in the name of Citibank Nominees Singapore Pte Ltd and 4,411 ordinary shares held in the name of DBS Nominees (Private) Limited.(2) Held by Director’s spouse.(3) 688,750 ordinary shares held in the name of DBS Nominees (Private) Limited and 2,000,000 ordinary shares held jointly with spouse in the name of', '4. PERFORMANCE SHARES The Executive Resource and Compensation Committee (“ERCC”) is responsible for administering the Singtel PSP 2012. At the date of this statement, the members of the ERCC are Peter Edward Mason AM (Chairman of the ERCC), Simon Claude Israel, Teo Swee Lian and Gail Kelly.  At the Extraordinary General Meeting held on 27 July 2012, the shareholders approved the adoption of the  Singtel PSP 2012. The duration of the Singtel PSP 2012 is 10 years commencing 27 July 2012. This plan gives the flexibility to either allot and issue and deliver new Singtel shares or purchase and deliver existing Singtel shares  upon the vesting of awards. The participants of the Singtel PSP 2012 will receive fully paid Singtel shares free of charge, the equivalent in cash, or combinations thereof, provided that certain prescribed performance targets or vesting conditions are met within a prescribed performance period. The performance period for the awards granted is three years, except for Restricted Share Awards which have a performance period of two years. The number of Singtel shares that will vest for each participant or category of participants will be determined at the end of the performance period based on the level of attainment of the performance targets or vesting conditions. Awards comprising an aggregate of 86.2 million shares have been granted under the Singtel PSP 2012 from its commencement to 31 March 2019.  Performance share awards granted, vested and cancelled during the financial year, and share awards outstanding at the end of the financial year, were as follows –', 'For other staff17.06.15 2,132 - - (2,111) (21) -28.09.15 15 - - (15) - -05.01.16 5 - - (5) - -20.06.16 4,710 - 1,676 (3,264) (206) 2,91620.03.17 20 - 8 (14) - 1419.06.17 6,910 - - (201) (474) 6,23521.09.17 87 - - - - 8718.12.17 77 - - - (48) 2914.03.18 150 - - - (32) 11819.06.18 - 9,132 - (17) (692) 8,42321.09.18 - 82 - - - 8218.12.18 - 77 - - - 7721.03.19 - 147 - - - 147', 'For other staff17.06.15 6,870 - - - (6,870) -28.09.15 125 - - - (125) -05.01.16 32 - - - (32) -20.06.16 6,956 - - - (376) 6,58020.03.17 91 - - - - 9119.06.17 3,897 - - - (189) 3,70821.09.17 24 - - - - 2418.12.17 53 - - - (36) 1714.03.18 79 - - - - 7919.06.18 - 3,537 - - (163) 3,37421.09.18 - 24 - - - 2418.12.18 - 12 - - - 12', '4. PERFORMANCE SHARES (Cont’d) During the financial year, awards in respect of an aggregate of 7.4 million shares granted under the Singtel PSP 2012 were vested. The awards were satisfied by the delivery of existing shares purchased from the market as permitted under the Singtel PSP 2012. As at 31 March 2019, no participant (other than Ms Chua Sock Koong) has received shares pursuant to the vesting of awards granted under the Singtel PSP 2012 which, in aggregate, represents five per cent or more of the aggregate of –(i) the total number of new shares available under the Singtel PSP 2012; and(ii) the total number of existing shares purchased for delivery of awards released under the Singtel PSP 2012.', 'There were no unissued shares of the Company under option at the end of the financial year. The particulars of the share option plans of subsidiary corporations of the Company are as follows: Amobee Group Pte. Ltd. In April 2015, Amobee, a wholly-owned subsidiary corporation of the Company, implemented the 2015 Long-Term Incentive Plan (“Amobee LTI Plan”). Under the terms of Amobee LTI Plan, options to purchase ordinary shares of Amobee may be granted to employees (including executive directors) and non-executive directors of Amobee and/or any of its subsidiaries.  Options are exercisable at a price no less than 100% of the fair value of the ordinary shares of Amobee on the date of grant.  From 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 62.6 million of ordinary shares in  Amobee have been granted to the employees and non-executive directors of Amobee and/or its subsidiaries.  As at 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 112.6 million of ordinary shares in Amobee are outstanding. The grant dates and exercise prices of the share options were as follows –', '5. SHARE OPTION PLANS (Cont’d) The options granted to employees and non-executive directors expire 10 years and 5 years from the date of grant respectively.  During the financial year, 10,879 ordinary shares of Amobee were issued pursuant to the exercise of options  granted under the Amobee LTI Plan. The persons to whom the options have been granted do not have the right to participate, by virtue of the options, in any share issue of any other company. Trustwave Holdings, Inc.  In December 2015, Trustwave Holdings, Inc. (“Trustwave”), a wholly-owned subsidiary corporation of the Company, implemented the Stock Option Incentive Plan (“Trustwave ESOP’’). Under the terms of the Trustwave ESOP, options to purchase common stock of Trustwave may be granted to employees (including executive directors) and  non-executive directors of Trustwave and/or any of its subsidiaries.  Options are exercisable at a price no less than 100% of the fair value of the common stock of Trustwave on the  date of grant.  From 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 0.6 million of common stock in Trustwave have been granted to the employees of Trustwave and/or its subsidiaries. As at 31 March 2019, options in respect  of an aggregate of 2.2 million of common stock in Trustwave are outstanding. The grant dates and exercise prices of the stock options were as follows –', '1 December 2015, 22 January 2016, 19 May 2016, 12 September 2016 US$16.7920 January 2017 US$16.2415 March 2018, 23 May 2018, 12 July 2018, 31 August 2018 US$15.37  The options granted expire 10 years from the date of grant.  No common stock of Trustwave was issued during the financial year pursuant to the exercise of options granted under the Trustwave ESOP. The persons to whom the options have been granted do not have the right to  participate, by virtue of the options, in any share issue of any other company. HOOQ Digital Pte. Ltd. In December 2015, HOOQ Digital Pte. Ltd. (“HOOQ”), a 65%-owned subsidiary corporation of the Company, implemented the HOOQ Digital Employee Share Option Scheme (“the Scheme”). Under the terms of the Scheme, options to purchase ordinary shares of HOOQ may be granted to employees (including executive directors)  of HOOQ and/or any of its subsidiaries.  Options are exercisable at a price no less than 100% of the fair value of the ordinary shares of HOOQ on the date  of grant.  From 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 9.6 million of ordinary shares in HOOQ have been granted to the employees of HOOQ and/or its subsidiaries. As at 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 43.3 million of ordinary shares in HOOQ are outstanding.', '16 May 2016, 24 April 2017, 2 May 2017, 31 July 2017, 8 September 2017,  23 October 2017, 10 January 2018, 1 April 2018, 1 July 2018, 19 October 2018,  31 January 2019 US$0.07 The options granted expire 10 years from the date of grant.  No ordinary shares of HOOQ were issued during the financial year pursuant to the exercise of options granted under the Scheme. The persons to whom the options have been granted do not have the right to participate, by virtue of the options, in any share issue of any other company.', '6. AUDIT COMMITTEE  At the date of this statement, the Audit Committee comprises the following members, all of whom are non-executive and independent – Bobby Chin Yoke Choong (Chairman of the Audit Committee) Gautam Banerjee  Christina Hon Kwee Fong (Christina Ong) Peter Ong Boon Kwee, who served during the financial year, stepped down as a member of the Audit Committee following the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting on 24 July 2018. The Audit Committee carried out its functions in accordance with Section 201B of the Singapore Companies Act, Chapter 50.  In performing its functions, the Committee reviewed the overall scope and results of both internal and external audits and the assistance given by the Company’s officers to the auditors. It met with the Company’s internal auditors to discuss the results of the respective examinations and their evaluation of the Company’s system of internal accounting controls. The Committee also held discussions with the internal and external auditors and is satisfied that the processes put in place by management provide reasonable assurance on mitigation of fraud  risk exposure to the Group. The Committee also reviewed the financial statements of the Company and the Group, as well as the Independent Auditors’ Report thereon. In the review of the financial statements of the Company and the Group, the Committee had discussed with management the accounting principles that were applied and their judgement of items that might affect the integrity of the financial statements.', '6. AUDIT COMMITTEE (Cont’d) In addition, the Committee had, with the assistance of the internal auditors, reviewed the procedures set up by  the Company and the Group to identify and report, and where necessary, sought appropriate approval for  interested person transactions. The Committee has full access to and has the co-operation of management and has been given the resources required for it to discharge its function properly. It also has full discretion to invite any executive officer to attend its meetings. The external and internal auditors have unrestricted access to the Audit Committee. The Committee has nominated KPMG LLP for re-appointment as auditors of the Company at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.', 'We have audited the financial statements of Singapore Telecommunications Limited (‘the Company’) and its subsidiaries (‘the Group’), which comprise the consolidated statement of financial position of the Group and the statement of financial position of the Company as at 31 March 2019 and the consolidated income statement, consolidated statement of comprehensive income, consolidated statement of changes in equity and consolidated statement of cash flows of the Group, and the statement of changes in equity of the Company for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies, as set out on pages 137 to 249.', 'In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements of the Group and the statement of financial position and statement of changes in equity of the Company are properly drawn up in accordance with the provisions of  the Singapore Companies Act, Chapter 50 (‘the Act’) and Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (International)  (‘SFRS(I)s’) so as to give a true and fair view of the consolidated financial position of the Group and the financial position of the Company as at 31 March 2019 and of the consolidated financial performance, consolidated changes in equity and consolidated cash flows of the Group and the changes in equity of the Company for the year ended on that date.', 'We conducted our audit in accordance with Singapore Standards on Auditing (‘SSAs’). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the ‘Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements’ section of our report. We are independent of the Group in accordance with the Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics for Public Accountants and Accounting Entities (‘ACRA Code’) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in Singapore, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and the ACRA Code. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.', 'Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.', 'For the main Operating Revenues – Mobile Service,  Data and Internet and Sale of Equipment, there is an inherent risk around the accuracy and timing of revenue recognition given the complexity of systems and the large volume of data processed, which are also impacted by changing pricing models and the introduction of new products and tariff arrangements.', 'Significant management judgements and estimates are required when accounting for revenue from long-term contracts with respect to the Group Enterprise Infocomm Technology (“ICT”) Operating Revenues. For some of these ICT contracts, estimates are required in determining the completeness and valuation of provisions against contracts that are expected to be loss-making and the recoverability of the contract assets.', 'Manual controls: Testing of the design and implementation, and the operating effectiveness of manual controls over the initiation, authorisation, recording, and processing of revenue transactions. This included evaluating process controls over authorising new price plans and rate changes and the adjustments to the relevant billing systems. We had also tested the access controls and change management controls over the relevant billing systems.revenue recognition and provisioning for contracts that were expected to be loss-making. We challenged management’s underlying assumptions in making their judgements on the provisions required. policies for the products and services offered by the Group in adopting SFRS(I) 15, which included but was not limited to: - Assessing the appropriateness of the transaction price and its allocation to performance obligations identified within bundled contracts based on stand-alone selling prices;', 'The Group performed impairment assessments for each of the CGUs by estimating the recoverable amounts. The recoverable amount is the discounted sum of individually forecasted cash flows for each year and the value of the cash flows for the years thereafter using a long-term growth rate. As the recoverable amount for each of the CGUs was calculated to be in excess of the respective carrying amounts, no impairment was determined.', 'Optus, Amobee and Global Cyber SecurityWe assessed the reasonableness of the key assumptions used by management in developing the cash flow forecasts and the discount rates used in computing the recoverable amounts, which included but are not limited to: model to Board approved forecasts and budgets;business developments and corroborated certain information with market data; we also considered planned operational improvements to the businesses and how these plans would impact future cash flows and whether these were appropriately reflected in the cash flow forecasts used;used by comparing against historical trends and recent performance and industry trends. Where relevant, assessing whether budgeted cash flows for prior years were achieved to assess forecasting accuracy;observable market data; andused to determine which reasonable changes to assumptions would change the outcome of the impairment assessment.', 'Our audit procedures included:ventures to understand the process and internal controls relating to the identification, assessment and recognition of the disputes and litigations.the joint ventures (‘Component Auditors’), in particular their assessment on the regulatory litigations and tax disputes that may have a material impact to the financial statements.of the probability and magnitude of losses relating to the disputes and litigations, and their conclusions reached in accordance with SFRS(I) 1-37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets.', 'With respect to the ATO matter:  appropriateness of management’s judgements taken on this matter, and the disclosure as a contingent liability, and that the amount paid continues to represent a receivable as at 31 March 2019;from external specialists to support the position taken by management; andto discuss the merits of the Group’s position on the specific issue audit by ATO.', 'Management is responsible for the other information contained in the annual report. Other information is defined as all information in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors’ report thereon. We have not obtained any other information prior to the date of this auditors’ report. The other information is expected to be made available to us after the date of this auditors’ report.', 'In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other information identified above when it becomes available and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.', 'Management is responsible for the preparation of financial statements that give a true and fair view in accordance with the provisions of the Act and SFRS(I)s, and for devising and maintaining a system of internal accounting controls sufficient to provide a reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded against loss from unauthorised use or disposition; and transactions are properly authorised and that they are recorded as necessary to permit the preparation of true and fair financial statements and to maintain accountability of assets.', 'In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless management either intends to liquidate the Group or to cease operations, or has no realistic alternative but to do so.', 'Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditors’ report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with SSAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.', 'As part of an audit in accordance with SSAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also:and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of  internal controls.in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s internal controls.disclosures made by management.evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditors’ report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditors’ report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Group to cease to continue as a going concern.', 'Independent Auditors’ ReportMembers of Singapore Telecommunications LimitedFor the financial year ended 31 March 2019the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion.', 'From the matters communicated with the directors, we determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditors’ report unless the law or regulations preclude public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.', 'Other income 6 224.7 258.8  4,691.9 5,050.5 Depreciation and amortisation 7 (2,222.2) (2,250.0)  2,469.7 2,800.5 Exceptional items 8 68.2 1,895.1 Profit on operating activities 2,537.9 4,695.6 Share of results of associates and joint ventures 9 1,562.7 1,804.0 Profit before interest, investment income (net) and tax 4,100.6 6,499.6 Interest and investment income (net) 10 38.1 45.5Finance costs 11 (392.8) (390.2) Profit before tax 3,745.9 6,154.9 Tax expense 12 (674.8) (703.0) Profit after tax 3,071.1 5,451.9 Attributable to:Shareholders of the Company 3,094.5 5,473.0Non-controlling interests (23.4) (21.1)  3,071.1 5,451.9 Earnings per share attributable to shareholders of the Company- basic (cents) 13 18.96 33.53- diluted (cents) 13 18.93 33.48', 'Note:The Group has adopted all applicable new and revised Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (International) (“SFRS(I)”) which became effective from  1 April 2018 and has applied them retrospectively. Accordingly, the comparatives have been restated to take into account adjustments relating to SFRS(I) 1,  First-time Adoption of SFRS(I), SFRS(I) 15, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and SFRS(I) 9, Financial Instruments.', 'Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 19 11,050.4 11,454.1 11,456.1 2,250.0 2,259.4 2,266.6Intangible assets 20 14,016.7 13,969.1 13,072.8 - - -Subsidiaries 21 - - - 20,009.2 19,425.9 17,441.0Joint ventures 22 12,857.9 12,786.5 12,285.3 22.8 22.8 23.0Associates 23 2,060.2 2,000.2 1,946.7 24.7 24.7 603.5Fair value through other comprehensive income (“FVOCI”) investments 25 646.9 197.9 192.9 5.3 5.5 37.4Derivative financial instruments 18 283.6 388.3 434.4 125.9 130.6 283.5Deferred tax assets 12 276.6 353.0 634.9 - - -Other assets 26 644.4 587.8 592.0 130.7 144.9 161.0Loan to an associate - - 1,100.5 - - 1,100.5', 'Current liabilitiesTrade and other payables 27 5,817.1 5,371.0 5,054.8 1,737.5 1,468.4 1,602.0Advance billings 812.1 794.1 861.1 89.8 80.1 74.8Current tax liabilities 255.0 351.3 296.3 83.6 101.5 100.6Borrowings (unsecured) 28 1,846.2 1,800.5 3,046.6 - - -Borrowings (secured) 29 34.0 23.1 86.7 4.8 7.4 1.5Derivative financial instruments 18 9.2 69.3 15.8 0.5 84.9 108.8Net deferred gain 31 20.8 20.1 68.8 - - -', 'Non-current liabilities             Advance billings  197.4  221.6  241.9  129.2  136.7  138.3Borrowings (unsecured) 28 8,734.4  8,586.1  7,898.2  786.5  739.5  802.7Borrowings (secured) 29 49.5 81.5 199.6 7.7 68.5 157.2Derivative financial instruments 18 149.5 277.0 279.4 191.8 250.9 344.0Net deferred gain 31 375.0 357.7 1,282.7 - - -Deferred tax liabilities 12 515.1 535.6 572.8 274.5 268.2 273.0Other non-current liabilities 32 289.8 295.1 324.2 26.5 31.4 23.7', 'Balance as at 1 April 2018,  previously reported 4,127.3 (1.0) 39.4 60.1 2.2 17,133.7 21,361.7 Effects of adoption of SFRS(I) 1, 9 and 15 - - - (56.1) - (21.5) (77.6) Balance as at 1 April 2018, restated 4,127.3 (1.0) 39.4 4.0 2.2 17,112.2 21,284.1 Changes in equity for the year Performance shares purchased  by the Company - (1.8) - - - - (1.8)Performance shares vested - 1.7 (1.7) - - - -Equity-settled share-based payment - - 13.6 - - - 13.6Transfer of liability to equity - - 7.8 - - - 7.8Cash paid to employees under  performance share plans - - (0.1) - - - (0.1)Contribution to Trust (5) - - (13.8) - - - (13.8)Final dividend paid (see Note 34) - - - - - (1,747.2) (1,747.2)Interim dividend paid (see Note 34) - - - - - (1,110.4) (1,110.4) - (0.1) 5.8 - - (2,857.6) (2,851.9) Total comprehensive income/ (loss)  for the year - - - 20.2 (0.2) 2,864.4 2,884.4 Balance as at 31 March 2019 4,127.3 (1.1) 45.2 24.2 2.0 17,119.0 21,316.6', 'Performance shares vested - 2.3 (2.3) - - - -Equity-settled share-based payment - - 11.8 - - - 11.8Transfer of liability to equity - - 4.2 - - - 4.2Cash paid to employees under  performance share plans - - (0.2) - - - (0.2)Contribution to Trust (5) - - (12.4) - - - (12.4)Final dividend paid (see Note 34) - - - - - (1,747.2) (1,747.2)Interim dividend paid (see Note 34) - - - - - (1,110.4) (1,110.4)Special dividend paid (see Note 34) - - - - - (489.9) (489.9)Reclassification due to disposal of', 'Presentation.(2) ‘Currency Translation Reserve’ relates mainly to the translation of the net assets of foreign subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures of the Group denominated mainly in Australian Dollar, Indian Rupee, Indonesian Rupiah, Philippine Peso, Thai Baht and United States Dollar.(3) ‘Other Reserves’ relate mainly to goodwill on acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 2001 and the share of other comprehensive income or loss of the associates and joint ventures. (4) This amount was a reserve for an obligation which arose from a put option written with the non-controlling shareholder of Trustwave Holdings, Inc. (“Trustwave”).', 'Payment for purchase of property, plant and equipment (1,718.1) (2,349.0)Purchase of intangible assets (216.7) (1,124.4)Investment in associate/ joint venture (Note 1) (2.3) (540.6)Payment for acquisition of subsidiary, net of cash acquired (Note 2) (5.8) (336.5)Payment for acquisition of intangibles and other assets (Note 3) (123.1) -Investment in FVOCI investments (Note 4) (436.9) (59.6)Proceeds from disposal of subsidiary 15.4 -Payment for acquisition of non-controlling interests (16.1) -Proceeds/ Deferred proceeds from disposal of associates and joint venture (Note 5) 14.8 1,146.4Repayment of loan by an associate (Note 5) - 1,100.5Proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment 160.9 142.6Proceeds from sale of FVOCI investments 14.8 77.7Interest received 7.0 16.4Dividends received from FVOCI investments (net of withholding tax paid) 0.3 1.8Withholding tax paid on intra-group interest income (22.7) (26.0)', 'Proceeds from term loans 7,157.1 6,948.6Repayment of term loans (6,983.1) (6,726.0)Proceeds from bond issue 1,177.6 430.2Repayment of bonds (1,139.1) (936.4)Increase in finance lease liabilites 44.3 18.0Finance lease payments (34.5) (46.3) Net proceeds from/ (repayment of) borrowings 222.3 (311.9)Final dividend paid to shareholders of the Company (1,746.7) (1,746.6)Interim dividend paid to shareholders of the Company (1,109.9) (1,110.0)Special dividend paid to shareholders of the Company - (489.7)Net interest paid on borrowings and swaps (385.1) (379.9)Settlement of swaps for bonds repaid (6.2) 61.4Purchase of performance shares (25.6) (25.0)Dividend paid to non-controlling interests (5.4) (5.4)Others 1.1 (2.1)', 'Note 2:  Payment for acquisition of subsidiary(a) On 28 December 2018, Singtel’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Optus Cyber Security Pty Limited, completed the acquisition of 100% of shares in Hivint Pty Limited (“Hivint”), a cyber security consulting company in Australia, for S$16.6 million (A$17 million). The fair values of identifiable net assets and the cash outflow on the acquisition were as follows –', 'Note 3:  Payment for acquisition of intangibles and other assets On 22 August 2018, Amobee completed the acquisition of the technology platform, intellectual property and certain other assets of Videology, Inc. and its subsidiaries for S$123.1 million (US$90 million). The fair values of identifiable net assets and the cash outflow on the acquisition were as follows –', 'Note 5: Proceeds from disposal of an associate, and repayment of loan by an associate In the previous financial year, Singtel sold its 100% interest in NetLink Trust to NetLink NBN Trust for an aggregate consideration of S$1.89 billion comprising a cash consideration of S$1.11 billion and 24.8% interest in NetLink NBN Trust. In addition, a unitholder loan of S$1.10 billion was repaid by NetLink Trust to Singtel.', '1. GENERAL Singtel is domiciled and incorporated in Singapore and is publicly traded on the Singapore Exchange. The address of its registered office is 31 Exeter Road, Comcentre, Singapore 239732. The principal activities of the Company consist of the operation and provision of telecommunications systems and services, and investment holding. The principal activities of the significant subsidiaries are disclosed in Note 44. In Singapore, the Group has the rights to provide fixed national and international telecommunications services to 31 March 2037, and public cellular mobile telephone services to 31 March 2032. In addition, the Group is licensed to offer Internet services and has also obtained frequency spectrum and licence rights to install, operate and maintain mobile communication systems and services including wireless broadband systems and services. The Group also holds the requisite licence to provide nationwide subscription television services. In Australia, Optus is granted telecommunication licences under the Telecommunications Act 1991. Pursuant to the Telecommunications (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 1997, the licences continued to have effect after the deregulation of telecommunications in Australia in 1997. The licences do not have a finite term, but are of continuing operation until cancelled under the Telecommunications Act 1997. These financial statements were authorised and approved for issue in accordance with a Directors’ resolution  dated 14 May 2019.', '2.1 Basis of Accounting (Cont’d)  Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods affected. Critical accounting estimates and assumptions used that are significant to the financial statements, and areas involving a higher degree of judgement are disclosed in Note 3.', '2.2.1 Functional and presentation currency  Items included in the financial statements of each entity in the Group are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates (the “functional currency”). The statement of financial position and statement of changes in equity of the Company and consolidated financial statements of the Group are presented in Singapore Dollar, which is the functional and presentation currency of the Company and the presentation currency of the Group.', '2.2.2 Transactions and balances Transactions in a currency other than the functional currency (“foreign currency”) are translated into the functional currency at the exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transactions. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the end of the reporting period are translated at exchange rates ruling at that date. Foreign exchange differences arising from translation are recognised in the income statement.', '2.2.3 Translation of foreign operations’ financial statements In the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, the assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated to Singapore Dollar at exchange rates ruling at the end of the reporting period except for share capital and reserves which are translated at historical rates of exchange (see below for translation of goodwill and fair value adjustments).  Income and expenses in the consolidated income statement are translated using either the average exchange rates for the month or year, which approximate the exchange rates at the dates of the transactions. All resulting translation differences are taken directly to ‘Other Comprehensive Income’. On loss of control of a subsidiary, loss of significant influence of an associate or loss of joint control of a joint venture, the accumulated translation differences relating to that foreign operation are reclassified from equity to the consolidated income statement as part of gain or loss on disposal.  On partial disposal where there is no loss of control of a subsidiary, the accumulated translation differences relating to the disposal are reclassified to non-controlling interests. For partial disposals of associates or joint ventures, the proportionate accumulated translation differences relating to the disposal are taken to the consolidated  income statement.', '2.2.4 Translation of goodwill and fair value adjustments Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of foreign entities completed on or after 1 April 2005 are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entities and are recorded in the functional currencies of the foreign entities and translated at the exchange rates prevailing at the end of the reporting period. However, for acquisitions of foreign entities completed prior to 1 April 2005, goodwill and fair value adjustments continue to be recorded at the exchange rates at the respective dates of the acquisitions.', '2.2.5 Net investment in a foreign entity  The exchange differences on loans from the Company to its subsidiaries, associates or joint ventures which form part of the Company’s net investment in the subsidiaries, associates or joint ventures are included in ‘Currency Translation Reserve’ in the consolidated financial statements. On disposal of the foreign entity, the accumulated exchange differences deferred in the ‘Currency Translation Reserve’ are reclassified to the consolidated income statement in a similar manner as described in Note 2.2.3.', '2.3 Cash and Cash Equivalents For the purpose of the consolidated statement of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand, balances with banks and fixed deposits with original maturity of mainly three months or less, net of bank overdrafts which are repayable on demand and which form an integral part of the Group’s cash management.  Bank overdrafts are included under borrowings in the statement of financial position.', '2.4  Contract Assets Where revenue recognised for a customer contract exceeds the amount received or receivable from a customer, a contract asset is recognised. Contract assets arise from bundled telecommunications contracts where equipment delivered at a point in time are bundled with services delivered over time. Contract assets also arise from information technology contracts where performance obligations are delivered over time (see Note 2.23). Contract assets are transferred to trade receivables when the consideration for performance obligations are billed. Contract assets are included in ‘Trade and other receivables’ under current assets as they are expected to be realised in the normal operating cycle. Contract assets are subject to impairment review for credit risk in accordance with the expected loss model.', '2.5 Trade and Other Receivables Trade and other receivables, including contract assets and receivables from subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, are initially recognised at fair values and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method, less an allowance for expected credit loss (“ECL”).  The Group applied the ‘simplified approach’ for determining the allowance for ECL for trade receivables and contract assets, where lifetime ECL are recognised in the income statement at initial recognition of receivables and updated at each reporting date. Lifetime ECL represents the expected credit losses that will result from all possible default events over the expected life of the receivable. When determining the allowance for ECL, the Group considers reasonable and supportable information that is relevant and available for customer types. This includes both qualitative and quantitative information based on the Group’s historical experience and forward looking information such as general economic factors as applicable. Loss events include financial difficulty or bankruptcy of the debtor, significant delay in payments and breaches of contracts.  Trade and other receivables are written off against the allowance for ECL when there is no reasonable expectation of recovery. Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are recognised in the income statement.', '2.10 Provisions A provision is recognised when there is a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events, it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation,  and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. No provision is recognised for future  operating losses.  For information technology contracts, a provision for expected project loss is made when it is probable that total contract costs will exceed total contract revenue.  Provisions are reviewed at the end of each reporting period and adjusted to reflect the current best estimate.', '2.11 Contingencies A contingent liability is a possible obligation that arises from past events and whose existence will be confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the Group; or a present obligation that arises from past events but is not recognised because it is not probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation; or the amount of the obligation cannot be measured with sufficient reliability. Contingent liabilities are not recognised on the statement of financial position of the Group, except for contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination that are present obligations and for which fair values can be  reliably determined.', '2.12.1 Subsidiaries Subsidiaries are entities (including structured entities) controlled by the Group. Control exists when the Group has power over the entity, is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns by using its power over the entity. Power is demonstrated through existing rights that give the Group the ability to direct activities that significantly affect the entity’s returns. The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the elements of control listed above. Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases. All significant inter-company balances and transactions are eliminated on consolidation.', '2.12.3 Joint ventures Joint ventures are joint arrangements whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have  rights to the net assets of the joint arrangements. Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement, which exists only when decisions about the relevant activities require unanimous consent of the parties sharing the control.  The Group’s interest in joint ventures is accounted for in the consolidated financial statements using the equity method of accounting. Where the Group’s interest in a joint venture reduces as a result of a deemed disposal, any gain or loss arising as a result of the deemed disposal is taken to the consolidated income statement.', '2.12.3 Joint ventures (Cont’d) Where the Group increases its interest in its existing joint venture and it remains as a joint venture, the incremental cost of investment is added to the existing carrying amount without considering the fair value of the joint venture’s identifiable assets and liabilities. In the consolidated statement of financial position, investments in joint ventures include goodwill on acquisition identified on acquisitions completed on or after 1 April 2001, net of accumulated impairment losses. Goodwill is assessed for impairment as part of the investment in joint ventures. The Group’s interest in its unincorporated joint operations is accounted for by recognising the Group’s assets and liabilities from the joint operations, as well as expenses incurred by the Group and the Group’s share of income earned from the joint operations, in the consolidated financial statements. Unrealised gains resulting from transactions with joint ventures are eliminated to the extent of the Group’s interest in the joint venture. Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains, but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.', '2.12.4 Dividends from associates and joint ventures  Dividends are recognised when the Group’s rights to receive payment have been established. Dividends received from an associate or joint venture in excess of the Group’s carrying value of the equity accounted investee are recognised as dividend income in the consolidated income statement where there is no legal or constructive obligation to refund the dividend nor is there any commitment to provide financial support to the investee. Equity accounting is then suspended until the investee has made sufficient profits to cover the income previously recognised for the excess cash distributions.', '2.12.6 Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method on and after 1 April 2010. The consideration for each acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values of assets given, liabilities incurred and equity interests issued by the Group and any contingent consideration arrangement at acquisition date. Acquisition-related costs, other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity, are expensed as incurred.  Any contingent consideration payable is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date. If the contingent consideration is classified as equity, it is not re-measured and settlement is accounted for within equity. Otherwise, subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration are recognised in the consolidated income statement. For business combinations that are achieved in stages, any existing equity interests in the acquiree entity  are re-measured to their fair values at acquisition date and any changes are taken to the consolidated  income statement.', '2.12.6 Business combinations (Cont’d) Non-controlling interests in subsidiaries represent the equity in subsidiaries which are not attributable, directly or indirectly, to the shareholders of the Company, and are presented separately in the consolidated statement  of comprehensive income, consolidated statement of changes in equity and within equity in the consolidated statement of financial position. The Group elects for each individual business combination whether non-controlling interests in the acquiree entity are recognised at fair value, or at the non-controlling interests’ proportionate  share of the fair value of the acquiree entity’s identifiable net assets, at the acquisition date.  Total comprehensive income is attributed to non-controlling interests based on their respective interests in a subsidiary, even if this results in the non-controlling interests having a debit balance.  Changes in the Group’s interest in subsidiaries that do not result in loss of control are accounted for as  equity transactions.  When the Group loses control of a subsidiary, any interest retained in the former subsidiary is recorded at fair value with the re-measurement gain or loss recognised in the consolidated income statement.', '2.13 Investments in Subsidiaries, Associates and Joint Ventures  In the Company’s statement of financial position, investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, including loans that meet the definition of equity instruments, are stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Where an indication of impairment exists, the carrying amount of the investment is assessed and written down immediately to its recoverable value. On disposal of investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the investment is recognised in the income statement of the Company.', '2.14 Fair Value Through Other Comprehensive Income (“FVOCI”) investments On initial recognition, the Group has made an irrevocable election to designate all equity investments (other than investments in subsidiaries, associates or joint ventures) as FVOCI investments as these are strategic investments held for the long term. They are initially recognised at fair value plus directly attributable transaction costs, with subsequent changes in fair value and translation differences recognised in ‘Other Comprehensive Income’ and accumulated within ‘Fair Value Reserve’ in equity. Upon disposal, the gain or loss accumulated in equity is transferred to retained earnings and is not reclassified to the income statement. Dividends are recognised in the income statement when the Group’s right to receive payments is established.  Purchases and sales of investments are recognised on trade date, which is the date that the Group commits to purchase or sell the investment.', '2.15 Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities The Group enters into the following derivative financial instruments to hedge its risks, namely – Cross currency swaps and interest rate swaps as fair value hedges for interest rate risk and cash flow hedges for currency risk arising from the Group’s issued bonds. The swaps involve the exchange of principal and floating or fixed interest receipts in the foreign currency in which the issued bonds are denominated, for principal and floating or fixed interest payments in the entities’ functional currencies. Forward foreign exchange contracts as cash flow hedges for the Group’s exposure to foreign currency exchange risks arising from forecasted or committed expenditure.', '2.15 Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities (Cont’d) Derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date the derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently re-measured at their fair values at the end of each reporting period.  A derivative financial instrument is carried as an asset when the fair value is positive and as a liability when the fair value is negative. Any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value are recognised immediately in the income statement, unless they qualify for hedge accounting.', 'Cash flow hedge  The effective portion of changes in the fair value of the designated derivative financial instruments that qualify as cash flow hedges are recognised in ‘Other Comprehensive Income’. The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement. Amounts accumulated in the ‘Hedging Reserve’ within equity are transferred to the income statement in the periods when the hedged items affect the income statement. However, when the hedged forecast transaction results in the recognition of a non-financial asset or a non-financial liability, the gain or loss previously recognised in ‘Other Comprehensive Income’ and accumulated in equity are removed from equity and included in the initial measurement of the cost of the non-financial asset or non-financial liability. This transfer does not affect ‘Other Comprehensive Income’. Furthermore, if the Group expects some or all the loss accumulated in ‘Other Comprehensive Income’ will not be recovered in the future, that amount is immediately reclassified to the income statement.  Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold, terminated, or exercised, or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting. Any cumulative gain or loss deferred in equity at that time remains in equity and is transferred to the income statement when the forecast transaction is recognised in the income statement. When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur, the cumulative gain or loss that was deferred in equity is recognised immediately in the income statement.', '2.16 Fair Value Estimation of Financial Instruments  Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date, regardless of whether that price is directly observable or estimated using another valuation technique. In estimating the fair value of an asset or a liability, the Group takes into account the characteristics of the asset or liability which market participants would take into account when pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date.  The following methods and assumptions are used to estimate the fair value of each class of financial instrument – Bank balances, receivables and payables, current borrowings The carrying amounts approximate fair values due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. Quoted and unquoted investments The fair values of investments traded in active markets are based on the market quoted price or the price quoted by the market maker at the close of business at the end of the reporting period.  The fair values of unquoted investments are determined primarily using recent arm’s length transactions. Cross currency and interest rate swaps The fair value of a cross currency or an interest rate swap is the estimated amount that the swap contract can be exchanged for or settled with under normal market conditions. This fair value can be estimated using the discounted cash flow method where the future cash flows of the swap contract are discounted at the prevailing market foreign exchange rates and interest rates. Market interest rates are actively quoted interest rates or interest rates computed by applying techniques to these actively quoted interest rates.', 'Non-current borrowings For disclosure purposes, the fair values of non-current borrowings which are traded in active markets are based on the quoted market ask price. For other non-current borrowings, the fair values are based on valuations provided by service providers or estimated by discounting the future contractual cash flows using discount rates based on the borrowing rates which the Group expects would be available at the end of the reporting period.', '2.17 Financial Guarantee Contracts Financial guarantees issued by the Company prior to 1 April 2010 are recorded initially at fair values plus transaction costs and amortised in the income statement over the period of the guarantee. Financial guarantees issued by the Company on or after 1 April 2010 are directly charged to the subsidiary as guarantee fees based on fair values.', '2.18 Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses, where applicable. The cost of self-constructed assets includes the cost of material, direct labour, capitalised borrowing costs and an appropriate proportion of production overheads. Depreciation is calculated on a straight-line basis to write off the cost of the property, plant and equipment over its expected useful life. Property, plant and equipment under finance lease is depreciated over the shorter of the lease term or useful life.  The estimated useful lives are as follows – No. of years', 'Buildings 5 - 40Transmission plant and equipment 5 - 25Switching equipment 3 - 15Other plant and equipment 2 - 20 Other plant and equipment consist mainly of finance-leased handsets, motor vehicles, office equipment, and furniture and fittings. No depreciation is provided on freehold land, long-term leasehold land with a remaining lease period of more than 100 years and capital work-in-progress. Leasehold land with a remaining lease period of 100 years or less is depreciated in equal instalments over its remaining lease period. In respect of capital work-in-progress, assets are depreciated from the month the asset is completed and ready  for use.', '2.18 Property, Plant and Equipment (Cont’d)  Costs of computer software which are an integral part of the related hardware are capitalised and recognised as assets and included in property, plant and equipment when it is probable that the costs will generate economic benefits beyond one year and the costs are associated with identifiable software products which can be reliably measured by the Group. The cost of property, plant and equipment includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items. Dismantlement, removal or restoration costs are included as part of the cost if the obligation for dismantlement, removal or restoration is incurred as a consequence of acquiring or using the asset. Costs may also include transfers from equity of any gains or losses on qualifying cash flow hedges of foreign currency purchases of property, plant and equipment. Subsequent expenditure is included in the carrying amount of an asset when it is probable that future economic benefits, in excess of the originally assessed standard of performance of the existing asset, will flow to the Group. The residual values and useful lives of property, plant and equipment are reviewed, and adjusted as appropriate, at the end of each reporting period.  On disposal of property, plant and equipment, the difference between the disposal proceeds and its carrying value is taken to the income statement.', '2.19.1 Goodwill Goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries on and after 1 April 2010 represents the excess of the consideration transferred, the recognised amount of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree entity and the fair value of any previous equity interest in the acquiree entity over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired, including contingent liabilities, at the acquisition date. Such goodwill is recognised separately as intangible asset and stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Acquisitions completed prior to 1 April 2001 Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures completed prior to 1 April 2001 had been adjusted in full against ‘Other Reserves’ within equity. Such goodwill has not been retrospectively capitalised  and amortised. The Group also had acquisitions where the costs of acquisition were less than the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired. Such differences (negative goodwill) were adjusted against ‘Other Reserves’ in the year of acquisition. Goodwill which has been previously taken to ‘Other Reserves’, is not taken to the consolidated income statement when the entity is disposed of or when the goodwill is impaired.', 'Acquisitions completed on or after 1 April 2001 Prior to 1 April 2004, goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures completed on or after 1 April 2001 was capitalised and amortised on a straight-line basis in the consolidated income statement over its estimated useful life of up to 20 years. In addition, goodwill was assessed for indications of impairment at the end of each reporting period.', '2.19.1 Goodwill (Cont’d) Since 1 April 2004, goodwill is no longer amortised but is tested annually for impairment or whenever there is an indication of impairment (see Note 2.20). The accumulated amortisation for goodwill as at 1 April 2004 had been eliminated with a corresponding decrease in the capitalised goodwill. A bargain purchase gain is recognised directly in the consolidated income statement. Gains or losses on disposal of subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures include the carrying amount of capitalised goodwill relating to the entity sold.', '2.19.2 Other intangible assets Expenditure on telecommunication and spectrum licences are capitalised and amortised using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives of 11 to 16 years.  Other intangible assets which are acquired in business combinations are carried at fair values at the date of acquisition, and amortised on a straight-line basis over the period of the expected benefits. Customer relationships or customer contracts, brand, and technology have estimated useful lives of 4 to 10 years. Other intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.', '2.20 Impairment of Non-Financial Assets Goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries is subject to an annual impairment test or is more frequently tested for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impaired. Goodwill is not amortised  (see Note 2.19.1). Other intangible assets of the Group, which have finite useful lives and are subject to amortisation, as well as property, plant and equipment and investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, are reviewed at the end of each reporting period to determine whether there is any indicator for impairment, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If any such indication exists, the assets’ recoverable amounts are estimated.  For the purposes of assessing impairment, assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows (cash-generating units). An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the asset’s carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount is the higher of the asset’s fair value less costs to sell and its value-in-use.  An impairment loss for an asset, other than goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries, is reversed if, and only if, there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the asset’s recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised. Impairment loss on goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries is not reversed.', '2.21 Non-current Assets (or Disposal Groups) Held For Sale Non-current assets (or disposal groups) are classified as assets held for sale and stated at the lower of their carrying amounts and fair value less costs to sell if their carrying amounts are recovered principally through sale transactions rather than through continuing use.', '2.22 Share Capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issuance of new equity shares are taken to equity as a deduction, net of tax, from the proceeds.   When the Company purchases its own equity share capital, the consideration paid, including any directly attributable costs, is recognised as ‘Treasury Shares’ within equity. When the shares are subsequently disposed, the realised gains or losses on disposal of the treasury shares are included in ‘Other Reserves’ of the Company. The Trust acquires shares in the Company from the open market for delivery to employees upon vesting of performance shares awarded under Singtel performance share plans. Such shares are designated as ‘Treasury Shares’. In the consolidated financial statements, the cost of unvested shares, including directly attributable costs, is recognised as ‘Treasury Shares’ within equity.  Upon vesting of the performance shares, the weighted average costs of the shares delivered to employees, whether held by the Company or the Trust, are transferred to ‘Capital Reserve’ within equity in the financial statements.', '2.24.1  Where the Group is the lessee Operating leases Leases where substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are not transferred to the Group are classified as operating leases. Operating lease payments are recognised as operating expenses in the income statement on a straight-line basis over the lease term.', '2.24.1  Where the Group is the lessee (Cont’d) Finance leases Finance leases are those leasing agreements which effectively transfer substantially all the risks and benefits incidental to ownership of the leased items to the Group. Assets financed under such leases are treated as if they  had been purchased outright at the lower of fair value and present value of the minimum lease payments. The liabilities to the lessor are recognised as finance lease obligations in the statement of financial position. Lease payments are apportioned between finance expenses and reduction of the lease liability to achieve a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.', '2.24.2 Where the Group is the lessor Operating leases Leases where the Group retains substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the assets are classified as operating leases.  Income from operating leases are recognised on a straight-line basis over the lease terms as the entitlement to the fees accrues. The leased assets are included in the statement of financial position as property, plant and equipment. Finance leases Leases of assets where substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of the assets are transferred by the Group to the lessees are classified as finance leases. Receivables under finance leases are presented in the statement of financial position at an amount equal to the net investment in the leases and the leased assets are derecognised. Finance income is allocated using a constant periodic rate of return on the net investment over the lease term. Sales of network capacity are accounted as finance leases where –(i) the purchaser’s right of use is exclusive and irrevocable;(ii) the asset is specific and separable;(iii) the terms of the contract are for the major part of the asset’s economic useful life;(iv) the attributable costs or carrying value can be measured reliably; and(v) no significant risks are retained by the Group.', '2.24.3 Gains or losses from sale and leaseback Gains on sale and leaseback transactions resulting in finance leases are deferred and amortised over the lease term on a straight-line basis, while losses are recognised immediately in the income statement.  Gains and losses on sale and leaseback transactions established at fair value which resulted in operating leases are recognised immediately in the income statement.', '2.25 Contract Costs (Cont’d) Costs to obtain contracts in the form of handset subsidies given to mobile customers via indirect channels are also capitalised in the statement of financial position but are amortised as a reduction of mobile service revenue over the contract period or expected customer relationship period. The contract period or expected customer relationship period typically ranges from 1 year to 2 years.  Capitalised contract costs are included in ‘Other Assets’ under non-current assets.', '2.26.1 Defined contribution plans Defined contribution plans are post-employment benefit plans under which the Group pays fixed contributions into separate entities such as the Central Provident Fund. The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to pay further contributions if any of the funds do not hold sufficient assets to pay all employee benefits relating to employee services in the current and preceding financial years. The Group’s contributions to the defined contribution plans are recognised in the income statement as expenses in the financial year to which they relate.', '2.26.2 Employees’ leave entitlements Employees’ entitlements to annual leave and long service leave are recognised when they accrue to employees.  A provision is made for the estimated liability of annual leave and long service leave as a result of services rendered by employees up to the end of the reporting period.', '2.26.3 Share-based compensation Performance shares and share options The performance share plans of the Group are accounted for either as equity-settled share-based payments or cash-settled share-based payments. The share option plans of the subsidiaries are accounted for as equity-settled share-based payments.  Equity-settled share-based payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant, whereas cash-settled share-based payments are measured at current fair value at the end of each reporting period. The share-based payment expense is amortised and recognised in the income statement on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.  At the end of each reporting period, the Group revises its estimates of the number of equity instruments that the participants are expected to receive based on non-market vesting conditions. The difference is charged or credited to the income statement, with a corresponding adjustment to equity or liability for equity-settled and cash-settled share-based payments respectively. The dilutive effects of the Singtel performance share plans are reflected as additional share dilution in the computation of diluted earnings per share.', '2.27 Borrowing Costs Borrowing costs comprise interest, amortisation of discounts or premiums relating to borrowings, amortisation of ancillary costs incurred in arranging the borrowings, and finance lease charges. Borrowing costs are generally expensed as incurred, except to the extent that they are capitalised if they are directly attributable to the acquisition, construction, or production of a qualifying asset.', '2.29 Government Grants Grants in recognition of specific expenses are recognised in the income statement over the periods necessary to match them with the relevant expenses they are intended to compensate. Grants related to depreciable assets are deferred and recognised in the income statement over the period in which such assets are depreciated and used in the projects subsidised by the grants.', '2.30 Income Tax (Cont’d) At the end of each reporting period, the Group re-assesses unrecognised deferred tax assets and the carrying amount of deferred tax assets. The Group recognises a previously unrecognised deferred tax asset to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered. The Group conversely reduces the carrying amount of a deferred tax asset to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient future taxable profit will be available to allow the benefit of all or part of the deferred tax asset to be utilised. Current and deferred tax are charged or credited directly to equity if the tax relates to items that are credited or charged, in the same or different period, directly to equity.', '3. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES, ASSUMPTIONS AND JUDGEMENTS The Group makes estimates and assumptions concerning the future. The resulting accounting estimates will, by definition, seldom be equal to the future actual results. As accounting standards are principles-based, professional judgement is required under certain circumstances. The estimates, assumptions and judgements that bear a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities are  discussed below.', '3.1 Impairment Reviews The accounting policies for impairment of non-financial assets are stated in Note 2.20. During an impairment review, the Group assesses whether the carrying amount of an asset or cash-generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount. Recoverable amount is defined as the higher of an asset’s or cash-generating unit’s fair value less costs to sell and its value-in-use. In making this judgement, the Group evaluates the value-in-use which is supported by the net present value of future cash flows derived from such assets or cash-generating units using cash flow projections which have been discounted at an appropriate rate. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on the Group’s estimates using historical, sector and industry trends, general market and  economic conditions, changes in technology and other available information.', '3.1 Impairment Reviews (Cont’d)  Goodwill recorded by associates and joint ventures is required to be tested for impairment at least annually. The impairment assessment requires the exercise of significant judgement about future market conditions, including growth rates and discount rates applicable in a number of markets where the associates and joint ventures operate.  The assumptions used by management to determine the value-in-use calculations of goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries are disclosed in Note 24. The carrying values of joint ventures and associates including goodwill capitalised are stated in Note 22 and Note 23 respectively.', '3.2 Expected Credit Loss (“ECL”) of Receivables At each reporting date, the Group assesses whether trade and other receivables are credit-impaired. The allowance for ECL is based on management’s assessment of the collectability of individual customer accounts taking into consideration the credit worthiness and financial condition of those customers. The Group also records an allowance for all other receivables based on management’s collective assessment of their collectability taking into consideration multiple factors including historical experience of credit losses, forward looking information as applicable and the aging of the receivables with allowances generally increasing as the receivable ages. If there is a deterioration of customers’ financial condition or if future default rates in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Group may have to adjust the allowance for credit losses, which would affect earnings in the  period that adjustments are made. The exposure to credit risk for receivables is disclosed in Note 16.', '3.3 Estimated Useful Lives of Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment balances represent a significant component of the Group’s assets. Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. The Group reviews the estimated useful lives of property, plant and equipment on an annual basis based on factors such as business plans and strategies, expected level of usage and future technological developments. It is possible that future results of operations could be materially affected by changes in these estimates brought about by changes in the factors mentioned above. A reduction in the estimated useful lives would increase the recorded depreciation and decrease the carrying value of property, plant and equipment.', '3.4 Taxation 3.4.1 Deferred tax asset The Group reviews the carrying amount of deferred tax assets at each reporting date. A deferred tax asset is recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised. This involves judgement regarding the future financial performance of the particular legal entity or tax group for which the deferred tax asset has been recognised.', '3.4.2 Income taxes The Group is subject to income taxes in numerous jurisdictions. Judgement is involved in determining the group-wide provision for income taxes. There are certain transactions and computations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain during the ordinary course of business, including the tax matters disclosed in Note 40(b). The Group recognises liabilities for expected tax issues based on estimates of whether additional taxes will be due. Where the final outcome of these matters is different from the amounts that were initially recognised, such differences will impact the income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.', '3.5 Fair values of derivative financial instruments The Group uses valuation techniques to determine the fair values of financial instruments. The valuation techniques used for different financial instruments are selected to reflect how the market would be expected to price the instruments, using inputs that reasonably reflect the risk-return factors inherent in the instruments. Depending upon the characteristics of the financial instruments, observable market factors are available for use in most valuations, while others involve a greater degree of judgment and estimation.', '3.6 Share-based Payments Equity-settled share-based payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant, whereas cash-settled share-based payments are measured at current fair value at the end of each reporting period. In addition, the Group revises the estimated number of equity instruments that participants are expected to receive based on non-market vesting conditions at the end of each reporting period. The Group uses expert valuation services to determine the fair values. The assumptions of the valuation model used to determine fair values are set out in Note 5.3.', '3.7 Contingent Liabilities The Group consults with its legal counsel on matters related to litigation, and other experts both within and  outside the Group with respect to matters in the ordinary course of business. As at 31 March 2019, the Group was involved in various legal proceedings where it has been vigorously defending its claims as disclosed in Note 40. Assessment on whether the risk of loss is remote, possible or probable requires significant judgement given the complexities involved. The Group’s associates and joint ventures also report significant contingent liabilities. The significant contingent liabilities of the Group’s associates and joint ventures are disclosed in Note 41.', '3.8 Revenue Recognition  The accounting policies for revenue recognition are stated in Note 2.23. The application of SFRS(I) 15 requires the Group to exercise judgement in identifying distinct or non-distinct performance obligations. For bundled telecommunications contracts, the Group is required to estimate the standalone selling prices of performance obligations, which materially impacts the allocation of revenue between performance obligations. Where the Group does not sell equivalent goods or services in similar circumstances on a standalone basis, it is necessary to estimate the standalone selling price. Changes in estimates of standalone selling prices can significantly influence the allocation of the transaction price between performance obligations. When estimating the standalone selling price, the Group maximises the use of observable inputs. The assessment of whether the Group presents operating revenue as the principal, or net after deduction of costs as an agent, is a matter of judgement which requires an analysis of both the legal form and the substance of contracts. Depending on the conclusion reached, there may be material differences in the amounts of revenues and expenses, though there is no impact on profit.', 'S$ Mil Mobile service (1) 5,395.7 5,737.3 Sale of equipment 2,876.7 2,414.5 Handset operating lease income 140.5 25.2Mobile 8,412.9 8,177.0Data and Internet 3,340.9 3,435.7 Business solutions 604.1 560.7 Cyber security 548.7 527.1 Other managed services 1,880.8 1,920.0Infocomm Technology (“ICT”) (2) 3,033.6 3,007.8Digital businesses (3) 1,245.3 1,113.1Fixed voice 899.0 1,084.3Pay television 372.7 369.4Others (4) 67.3 80.7', 'Virtual Network Operators) and mobile content services such as music and video. (2) Includes equipment sales related to ICT services. (3) Mainly from provisions of digital marketing and advertising services and regional premium OTT video. (4) Includes energy reselling fees. As at 31 March 2019, the transaction price attributable to unsatisfied performance obligations for ICT services rendered by NCS Pte. Ltd. is approximately S$3 billion which will be recognised as operating revenue mostly over the next 5 years.  Service contracts with consumers typically range from a month to 2 years, and contracts with enterprises typically range from 1 to 3 years.', 'Notes:(1) Comprise base salary, bonus, contributions to defined contribution plans and other benefits, but exclude performance share and share option expenses disclosed below. (2) The Group Chief Executive Officer, an executive director of Singtel, was awarded up to 1,030,168 (2018: 1,712,538) ordinary shares of Singtel pursuant to Singtel performance share plans, subject to certain performance criteria including other terms and conditions being met. The performance share award in the previous financial year included a one-off Special Share Award (“SSA”). The performance share expense computed in accordance with SFRS(I) 2, Share-based Payment, was S$1.5 million (2018: S$3.3 million).(3) The other key management personnel of the Group comprise the Chief Executive Officers of Consumer Singapore, Consumer Australia, Group Enterprise, Group Digital Life and International Group, as well as the Group Chief Corporate Officer, Group Chief Financial Officer, Group Chief Human Resources Officer, Group Chief Information Officer and Group Chief Technology Officer. The other key management personnel were awarded up to 3,537,119 (2018: 4,391,498) ordinary shares of Singtel pursuant to Singtel performance share plans, subject to certain performance criteria including other terms and conditions being met. The performance share award in the previous financial year included a one-off SSA. The performance share expense computed in accordance with SFRS(I) 2 was S$6.1 million (2018: S$8.5 million). (4) Directors’ remuneration comprises the following:(i) Directors’ fees of S$2.7 million (2018: S$2.5 million), including fees paid to certain directors in their capacities as members of the Optus Advisory', 'Committee and the Technology Advisory Panel, and as director of Singtel Innov8 Pte. Ltd.(ii) Car-related benefits of the Chairman of S$24,557 (2018: S$20,446).  In addition to the Directors’ remuneration, Venkataraman Vishnampet Ganesan, a non-executive director of Singtel, was awarded 831,087 (2018: Nil)  of share options pursuant to the Amobee Long-Term Incentive Plan during the financial year, subject to certain terms and conditions being met.  The share option expense computed in accordance with SFRS(I) 2 was S$104,278 (2018: S$21,607).', '5.3.1 Performance share plans With effect from 1 April 2012, Restricted Share Awards and Performance Share Awards are given to selected employees of Singtel and its subsidiaries. The awards are conditional upon the achievement of predetermined performance targets or vesting conditions over the performance period, which is two years for the Restricted Share Awards and three years for the Performance Share Awards. Both awards are generally settled by delivery of  Singtel shares, with the awards for certain senior executives to be settled by Singtel shares or cash, at the option of the recipient.', '5.3.1 Performance share plans (Cont’d) Additionally, early vesting of the performance shares can also occur under special circumstances approved by the Executive Resource and Compensation Committee such as retirement, redundancy, illness and death while in employment. Though the performance shares are awarded by Singtel, the respective subsidiaries bear all costs and expenses in any way arising out of, or connected with, the grant and vesting of the awards to their employees. The fair values of the performance shares are estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation methodology at the measurement dates, which are the grant value dates for equity-settled awards, and at the end of the reporting period for cash-settled awards. In recognition of the value created from the development and operation of Singapore’s nationwide fibre network infrastructure and the successful IPO of NetLink NBN Trust in July 2017, Senior Management received a one-off Special Share Award in July 2018.  Restricted Share Awards  The movements of the number of performance shares for the Restricted Share Awards during the financial year were as follows –', '5.3.2 Amobee’s share options - equity-settled arrangement In April 2015, Amobee Group Pte. Ltd. (“Amobee”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, implemented the 2015 Long-Term Incentive Plan (“Amobee LTI Plan”). Selected employees (including executive directors)  and non-executive directors of Amobee and/or its subsidiaries are granted options to purchase ordinary shares  of Amobee.  Options are exercisable at a price no less than 100% of the fair value of the ordinary shares of Amobee on the date of grant. Options for employees are scheduled to be fully vested in either 3 years or 3.5 years from the vesting commencement date.  The grant dates, exercise prices and fair values of the share options were as follows –', 'For employees13 April 2015 0.79 0.224 to 0.26114 October 2015 0.54 to 0.79 0.217 to 0.28720 January 2016, 10 May 2016, 24 August 2016, 25 January 2017 0.54 0.28723 June 2016 0.54 0.273 to 0.28719 July 2017, 18 August 2017, 12 September 2017, 25 January 2018 0.54 0.260 to 0.26821 August 2018, 25 March 2019 0.55 to 0.58 0.259 to 0.266', 'For non-executive directors14 October 2015 0.54 0.20321 August 2018 0.55 0.181  The terms of the options granted to employees and non-executive directors are 10 years and 5 years from the  date of grant respectively.  The fair values for the share options granted were estimated using the Black-Scholes pricing model. From 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019, (a) options in respect of an aggregate of 62.6 million of ordinary shares in Amobee have been granted to the employees and non-executive directors of Amobee and/or its subsidiaries. (b) 10,879 ordinary shares of Amobee were issued pursuant to the exercise of options granted under the  Amobee LTI Plan.  As at 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 112.6 million of ordinary shares in Amobee are  outstanding.', '5.3.3 Trustwave’s share options - equity-settled arrangement  In December 2015, Trustwave Holdings, Inc. (“Trustwave”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, implemented the Stock Option Incentive Plan (“Trustwave ESOP”). Selected employees (including executive directors) and  non-executive directors of Trustwave and/or its subsidiaries are granted options to purchase common stock  of Trustwave.  Options are exercisable at a price no less than 100% of the fair value of the common stock of Trustwave on the date of grant, and are scheduled to be fully vested 4 years from the vesting commencement date.  The grant dates, exercise prices and fair values of the stock options were as follows –', '1 December 2015 16.79 6.5722 January 2016 16.79 6.2819 May 2016 16.79 6.16 to 6.2712 September 2016 16.79 6.03 to 6.1020 January 2017 16.24 5.93 to 6.5715 March 2018 15.37 6.71 to 6.9223 May 2018 15.37 6.80 to 7.0512 July 2018 15.37 6.9731 August 2018 15.37 6.17 The term of each option granted is 10 years from the date of grant.  The fair values for the stock options granted were estimated using the Black-Scholes pricing model.  From 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 0.6 million of common stock in Trustwave have been granted. As at 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 2.2 million of common stock in Trustwave are outstanding.', 'HOOQ Digital Employee Share Option Scheme (the “Scheme”). Selected employees (including executive directors) of HOOQ and/or its subsidiaries are granted options to purchase ordinary shares of HOOQ.  Options are exercisable at a price no less than 100% of the fair value of the ordinary shares of HOOQ on the date of grant, and are scheduled to be fully vested 4 years from the vesting commencement date.   The grant dates, exercise prices and fair values of the share options were as follows –', '16 May 2016 0.07 0.0445 to 0.046324 April 2017 0.07 0.0301 to 0.03152 May 2017 0.07 0.0292 to 0.031331 July 2017 0.07 0.0313 to 0.03158 September 2017 0.07 0.0296 to 0.029823 October 2017 0.07 0.0309 to 0.032010 January 2018 0.07 0.0316 to 0.03181 April 2018 0.07 0.0360 to 0.03661 July 2018 0.07 0.0368 to 0.037319 October 2018 0.07 0.0371 to 0.037431 January 2019 0.07 0.0367 to 0.0369 The term of each option granted is 10 years from the date of grant.  The fair values for the share options granted were estimated using the Black-Scholes pricing model.  From 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 9.6 million of ordinary shares in  HOOQ have been granted. As at 31 March 2019, options in respect of an aggregate of 43.3 million of  ordinary shares in HOOQ are outstanding.', 'Balance as at 31 March 8,231 7,613 28.0 29.1 Upon consolidation of the Trust in the consolidated financial statements, the weighted average cost of vested Singtel shares is taken to ‘Capital Reserve’ whereas the weighted average cost of unvested shares is taken to ‘Treasury Shares’ within equity. See Note 2.22.', 'KPMG, Australia in respect of tax services, certification and review for regulatory purposes. In the previous financial year, the non-audit fees included S$0.2 million and S$0.3 million paid to Deloitte & Touche LLP, Singapore, and Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Australia, respectively in respect of tax services, certification and review for regulatory purposes.  The Audit Committee had undertaken a review of the non-audit services provided by the auditors, KPMG LLP, and in the opinion of the Audit Committee, these services did not affect the independence of the auditors.', 'Tax calculated at tax rate of 17 per cent (2018: 17 per cent) 371.1 739.7Effects of –Different tax rates of other countries 36.3 79.4Income not subject to tax (29.5) (342.7)Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 29.4 33.7Deferred tax asset not recognised 79.1 39.6Change in tax rate of other country - (27.5)Others (3.0) (15.9)', 'Balance as at 1 April 2018, previously reported 43.1 79.2 22.8 237.2 382.3Effects of adoption of SFRS(I) 1, 9 and 15 - - (4.4) (2.7) (7.1)Balance as at 1 April 2018, restated 43.1 79.2 18.4 234.5 375.2Credited/ (Charged) to income statement 2.3 (25.6) (19.0) (9.6) (51.9)Charged to other comprehensive income - - - (5.9) (5.9)Transfer to current tax (5.3) - - - (5.3)Translation differences (2.7) (2.9) 0.6 (5.7) (10.7)', 'Balance as at 1 April 2018, previously reported (470.9) (5.2) (66.5) (542.6)Effects of adoption of SFRS(I) 1 and 15 59.0 - (74.2) (15.2)Balance as at 1 April 2018, restated (411.9) (5.2) (140.7) (557.8)(Charged)/ Credited to income statement (47.2) (0.1) 47.6 0.3Transfer to current tax - - 19.7 19.7Disposal of subsidiary (0.1) - - (0.1)Translation differences (0.7) - (1.3) (2.0)', 'Balance as at 1 April 2017, previously reported 40.3 137.8 21.7 469.6 669.4Effects of adoption of SFRS(I) 1, 9 and 15 - - (2.1) (20.8) (22.9)Balance as at 1 April 2017, restated 40.3 137.8 19.6 448.8 646.5Credited/ (Charged) to income statement 5.2 (53.1) - (198.5) (246.4)Charged to other comprehensive income - - - (8.4) (8.4)Transfer from current tax 1.0 - - - 1.0Translation differences (3.4) (5.5) (1.2) (7.4) (17.5)', 'Balance as at 1 April 2017, previously reported (457.8) (5.1) (123.3) (586.2)Effects of adoption of SFRS(I) 1 and 15 74.3 - (72.5) 1.8Balance as at 1 April 2017, restated (383.5) (5.1) (195.8) (584.4)Acquisition of a subsidiary - - (21.4) (21.4)(Charged)/ Credited to income statement (29.2) (0.1) 71.7 42.4Transfer to current tax 0.5 - 1.3 1.8Translation differences 0.3 - 3.5 3.8', 'Notes:(1) TWDV – Tax written down value(2) NBV – Net book value Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set-off current tax assets against current tax liabilities, and when deferred income taxes relate to the same fiscal authority.  The amounts, determined after appropriate offsetting, are shown in the statements of financial position as follows –', 'Deferred tax assets 276.6 353.0 634.9 - - -Deferred tax liabilities (515.1) (535.6) (572.8) (274.5) (268.2) (273.0)(238.5) (182.6) 62.1 (274.5) (268.2) (273.0) Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that realisation of the related tax benefits through future taxable profits is probable. As at 31 March 2019, the subsidiaries of the Group had estimated unutilised income tax losses of approximately S$1.65 billion (31 March 2018: $1.35 billion), of which S$25 million (31 March 2018: S$16 million) will expire in the next five years and S$960 million (31 March 2018: S$700 million) will expire from 2024 to 2037.', '12.2 Deferred Taxes (Cont’d) As at 31 March 2019, the subsidiaries of the Group also had estimated unutilised investment allowances of  S$46 million (31 March 2018: S$48 million), unutilised capital tax losses of S$69 million (31 March 2018: S$91 million) and unabsorbed capital allowances of approximately S$19 million (31 March 2018: S$10 million).  These unutilised income tax losses and investment allowances, and unabsorbed capital allowances are available for set-off against future taxable profits, subject to the agreement of the relevant tax authorities and compliance with certain provisions of the income tax regulations of the respective countries in which the subsidiaries operate. The unutilised capital tax losses are available for set-off against future capital gains of a similar nature subject to compliance with certain statutory tests in Australia. As at the end of the reporting period, the potential tax benefits arising from the following items were not recognised in the financial statements due to uncertainty on their recoverability –', 'Note:(1) Adjusted to exclude the number of performance shares held by the Trust and the Company. ‘Basic earnings per share’ is calculated by dividing the Group’s profit attributable to shareholders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the financial year. For ‘Diluted earnings per share’, the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue includes the number of additional shares outstanding if the potential dilutive ordinary shares arising from the performance shares granted by the Group were issued. Adjustment is made to earnings for the dilutive effect arising from the associates and joint ventures’ dilutive shares.', 'Fixed deposits 153.5 122.7 164.1 42.4 28.0 27.6 Cash and bank balances 359.2 402.2 369.7 39.2 64.0 61.6         512.7 524.9 533.8 81.6 92.0 89.2  The carrying amounts of the cash and cash equivalents approximate their fair values. Cash and cash equivalents denominated in currencies other than the respective functional currencies of the  Group’s entities were as follows – Group Company', 'Less than three months 142.9 105.7 147.8 42.4 28.0 27.6Over three months 10.6 17.0 16.3 -  -  -         153.5 122.7 164.1 42.4 28.0 27.6   As at 31 March 2019, the weighted average effective interest rate of the fixed deposits of the Group and the  Company were 2.1 per cent (31 March 2018: 1.6 per cent) per annum and 2.2 per cent (31 March 2018: 1.7 per cent) per annum respectively. The exposure of cash and cash equivalents to interest rate risks is disclosed in Note 36.3.', 'Prepayments 685.0 552.3 540.3 73.5 57.6 60.2Interest receivable 70.3 73.4 74.9 29.3 31.4 34.4Others 13.7 15.4 13.9 - - -      5,992.7 5,813.7 5,762.4 1,960.9 2,323.9 1,673.3 “ECL” denotes expected credit loss. Trade receivables are non-interest bearing and are generally on 14-day or 30-day terms, while balances due from carriers are on 60-day terms. There was no significant change in contract assets during the year.  As at 31 March 2019, the effective interest rate of an amount due from a subsidiary of S$331.0 million (31 March 2018: S$824.5 million) was 0.33 per cent (31 March 2018: 0.12 per cent) per annum. The loans to subsidiaries and amounts due from other subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures were unsecured, interest-free and repayable on demand.  An amount of S$6.8 million (31 March 2018: S$18.8 million) under other receivables of the Group is guaranteed by  a third party and repayable by 31 March 2020.', 'Less than 60 days 4,344.5 4,324.2 4,263.6  297.1 327.4 332.9 61 to 120 days 222.2 198.7 114.4  61.2 45.1 32.4 More than 120 days 365.6 326.0 310.4  85.9 115.1 127.0  4,932.3 4,848.9 4,688.4  444.2 487.6 492.3  The movements in the allowance for expected credit losses of trade receivables and contract assets were as  follows –  Group Company', 'Individuals 2,269.4 2,366.8 2,409.4 131.8 141.8 145.9 Corporations and others 2,403.2 2,218.3 2,030.1 218.1 249.4 255.7  4,672.6 4,585.1 4,439.5 349.9 391.2 401.6  The expected credit losses for debts which are collectively assessed are estimated based on a provision matrix by reference to historical credit loss experience of the different segments, adjusted as appropriate to reflect current conditions and estimates of future economic conditions as applicable. The expected credit losses for debts which are individually assessed are based on an analysis of the debtor’s current financial position and are adjusted for factors that are specific to the debtors.', 'Balance as at 1 April, previously reported 60.6 243.6 (159.7) (88.0)Effects of adoption of SFRS(I) 9 4.0 1.7 24.6 24.6 Balance as at 1 April, restated 64.6 245.3 (135.1) (63.4)Fair value gains/ (losses)     - included in income statement 163.5 (97.5) 50.1 (63.5)- included in ‘Hedging Reserve’ 59.6 (10.3) 19.3 (8.2)Settlement of swaps for bonds repaid 6.2 (61.4) -  -  Translation differences (13.9) (11.5) -  -       Balance as at 31 March 280.0 64.6 (65.7) (135.1) Group Company 31 March', '18.1 Fair Values The fair values of the currency and interest rate swap contracts exclude accrued interest of S$16.3 million  (31 March 2018: S$16.8 million). The accrued interest is separately disclosed in Note 16 and Note 27. The fair values of the derivative financial instruments were as follows – Group CompanyFair values Fair values', 'Fair value and cash flow hedges      Cross currency swaps 414.6 95.5 1.0 60.2 Interest rate swaps 11.1 59.8 - 8.9 Forward foreign exchange contracts 12.9 1.5 3.3 1.0     Derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting      Cross currency swaps - - 104.7 104.7 Interest rate swaps - 1.9 17.5 17.5 Forward foreign exchange contracts 0.1 - 0.1 -      438.7 158.7 126.6 192.3Disclosed as –      Current 155.1 9.2 0.7 0.5 Non-current 283.6 149.5 125.9 191.8      438.7 158.7 126.6 192.3', 'Fair value and cash flow hedges     Cross currency swaps 397.3 228.4 -  111.1  Interest rate swaps 13.5 88.3 -  7.2  Forward foreign exchange contracts 0.1 25.2 -  16.8      Derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting      Cross currency swaps -  -  182.5 182.5  Interest rate swaps -  4.4 18.2 18.2', 'Fair value and cash flow hedges Cross currency swaps 509.1 129.0 2.5 50.3  Interest rate swaps 29.1 131.5 -  7.5  Forward foreign exchange contracts 2.1 27.1 2.1 10.2      Derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting      Cross currency swaps -  -  346.5 346.5  Interest rate swaps -  7.6 38.3 38.3  Forward foreign exchange contracts 0.2 -  -  -       540.5 295.2 389.4 452.8 Disclosed as –      Current 106.1 15.8 105.9 108.8  Non-current 434.4 279.4 283.5 344.0       540.5 295.2 389.4 452.8', '18.1 Fair Values (Cont’d)  The cash flow hedges are designated for foreign currency commitments and repayments of principal and interest of foreign currency denominated bonds.  The forecast transactions for the foreign currency commitments are expected to occur in the financial year ending 31 March 2020, while the forecast transactions for the repayment of principal and interest of the foreign currency denominated bonds will occur according to the timing disclosed in Note 28. As at 31 March 2019, the details of the outstanding derivative financial instruments were as follows – Group Company31 March', 'Interest rate swaps       Notional principal (S$ million equivalent) 2,557.4 2,702.5 3,680.9 2,663.4 2,838.4 4,639.6  Fixed interest rates 2.0% - 6.2% 2.0% - 6.2% 1.2% - 6.2% 2.0% - 4.5% 2.0% - 4.5% 1.2% - 4.5% Floating interest rates 1.8% - 3.6% 2.0% - 3.2% 1.8% - 2.3% 1.8% - 3.6% 1.1% - 3.2% 1.1% - 2.3%       Cross currency swaps', 'Notional principal (S$ million equivalent) 4,600.2 4,794.9 6,073.3 5,014.4 5,256.8 7,543.6  Fixed interest rates 2.6% - 7.5% 1.9% - 7.5% 1.9% - 7.5% 2.4% - 5.2% 0.9% - 5.2% 0.9% - 5.2% Floating interest rates 2.3% - 4.0% 1.5% - 3.5% 1.5% - 3.3% 2.3% - 4.0% 1.5% - 3.3% 1.5% - 3.2%       Forward foreign exchange', 'Balance as at 1 April 2,355.5 1,565.5 -  -  Additions 130.2 1,118.3 -  -  Amortisation for the year (210.0) (221.6) -  -  Reclassification (71.8) -  -  -  Translation differences (87.7) (106.7) -  -         Balance as at 31 March 2,116.2 2,355.5 -  -      Cost 3,622.9 3,817.1 -  8.4 Accumulated amortisation (1,500.5) (1,455.4) -  (8.4)Accumulated impairment (6.2) (6.2) -  -         Net book value as at 31 March 2,116.2 2,355.5 -  -', 'Balance as at 1 April 204.6 302.5 Acquisition of a subsidiary 18.8 53.3 Amortisation for the year (46.5) (58.5)Impairment charge for the year -  (75.8)Translation differences 7.0 (16.9)   Balance as at 31 March 183.9 204.6  Cost 611.7 586.3 Accumulated amortisation (334.8) (288.6)Accumulated impairment (93.0) (93.1)   Net book value as at 31 March 183.9 204.6', 'Unquoted equity shares, at cost 14,259.7 13,676.4 11,001.2 Shareholders’ advances 5,733.0 5,733.0 6,423.3 Deemed investment in a subsidiary 32.5 32.5 32.5  20,025.2 19,441.9 17,457.0 Less: Allowance for impairment losses (16.0) (16.0) (16.0)     20,009.2 19,425.9 17,441.0   The advances given to subsidiaries were interest-free and unsecured with settlement neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future. The deemed investment in a subsidiary, Singtel Group Treasury Pte. Ltd. (“SGT”), arose from financial guarantees provided by the Company for loans drawn down by SGT prior to 1 April 2010.  The significant subsidiaries of the Group are set out in Note 44.1 to Note 44.3.', 'Less: Allowance for impairment losses (30.0) (30.0) (30.0) -  -  -   12,857.9 12,786.5 12,285.3 22.8 22.8 23.0   As at 31 March 2019, (i) The market value of the quoted equity shares in joint ventures held by the Group was S$18.89 billion  (31 March 2018: S$21.29 billion).(ii) The Group’s proportionate interest in the capital commitments of joint ventures was S$1.97 billion  (31 March 2018: S$2.14 billion).  The details of joint ventures are set out in Note 44.5. Optus has an interest in an unincorporated joint operation to share certain 4G network sites and radio infrastructure across Australia whereby it holds an interest of 50% (31 March 2018: 50%) in the assets, with access to the shared network and shares 50% (31 March 2018: 50%) of the cost of building and operating the network. The Group’s property, plant and equipment included the Group’s interest in the property, plant and equipment employed in the unincorporated joint operation was S$1.10 billion (31 March 2018: S$1.08 billion).', '22. JOINT VENTURES (Cont’d) The summarised financial information of the Group’s significant joint ventures namely Bharti Airtel Limited (“Airtel”), PT Telekomunikasi Selular (“Telkomsel”), Globe Telecom, Inc. (“Globe”) and Advanced Info Service Public Company Limited (“AIS”), based on their financial statements and a reconciliation with the carrying amounts of the  investments in the consolidated financial statements were as follows – Group - 2019', 'As at 31 March 2019,(i) The market values of the quoted equity shares in associates held by the Group and the Company  were S$2.98 billion (31 March 2018: S$3.13 billion) and S$494.0 million (31 March 2018: S$676.8 million)  respectively.(ii) The Group’s proportionate interest in the capital commitments of the associates was S$139.9 million  (31 March 2018: S$166.6 million).', '24. IMPAIRMENT REVIEWS Goodwill arising on acquisition of subsidiaries  The carrying values of the Group’s goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries as at 31 March 2019 were assessed for impairment during the financial year.  Goodwill is allocated for impairment testing purposes to the individual entity which is also the cash-generating  unit (“CGU”).  The Group is structured into three business segments, Group Consumer, Group Enterprise and Group Digital Life. Based on the relative fair value approach, the goodwill of Optus was fully allocated to Consumer Australia included in the Group Consumer segment for the purpose of goodwill impairment testing. The recoverable values of cash-generating units including goodwill are determined based on value-in-use calculations. The value-in-use calculations apply a discounted cash flow model using cash flow projections based on financial budgets and forecasts approved by management. The Group has used cash flow projections of five years except for Amobee and the Global Cyber Security business which were based on cash flow projections of thirteen years and ten years respectively to better reflect their stages of growth. Cash flows beyond the terminal year are extrapolated using the estimated growth rates stated in the table below. Key assumptions used in the calculation of value-in-use are growth rates, operating margins, capital expenditure and discount rates. The terminal growth rates used do not exceed the long term average growth rates of the respective industry and country in which the entity operates and are consistent with forecasts included in industry reports.  The discount rates applied to the cash flow projections are based on Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) where the cost of a company’s debt and equity capital are weighted to reflect its capital structure.  The details of other subsidiaries are shown in the table below:', ""Balance as at 1 April 197.9 192.9 5.5 37.4 Additions 437.1 59.6 -  -  Disposals/ Write-offs (9.6) (68.3) -  (31.4)Net fair value gains/ (losses) included in  'Other Comprehensive Income' 13.2 9.6 (0.2) (0.5)Translation differences 8.3 4.1 -  -       Balance as at 31 March 646.9 197.9 5.3 5.5  Group Company31 March"", 'Note:(1) In November 2016, the Group paid A$134 million to the Australian Taxation Office (“ATO”) for amended tax assessments received in respect of the acquisition financing of Optus. This payment has been recorded as a tax recoverable from the ATO pending outcome of its objections to the ATO  (see Note 40(b)). The movements in capitalised contract costs (net) were as follows –  Group Company2019', 'Trade payables 4,393.8 3,994.0 3,590.7 657.2 585.5 592.9Accruals 844.3 877.0 985.9 226.0 245.9 160.4Interest payable on borrowings and swaps 132.1 137.9 142.7 40.3 41.7 43.6Contract liabilities (handset sales) 111.7 136.4 129.9 - - -Deferred income 54.5 38.3 31.3 26.6 12.6 11.5Customers’ deposits 33.6 26.6 26.2 19.3 15.3 15.8Due to associates and joint ventures- trade 47.7 31.0 27.9 21.5 23.9 22.3- non-trade 0.1 * * - - -', '5,817.1 5,371.0 5,054.8 1,737.5 1,468.4 1,602.0“*” denotes amount of less than S$0.05 million.  The trade payables are non-interest bearing and are generally settled on 30 or 60 days terms, with some payables relating to handset and network investments having payment terms of up to a year.  The interest payable on borrowings and swaps are mainly settled on a quarterly or semi-annual basis.  The amounts due to subsidiaries are unsecured, repayable on demand and interest-free.', 'US$2,100 million (1)  ( 31 March 2018: US$1,600 million  31 March 2017: US$2,300 million) 2,832.0 2,088.8 3,201.4 - - -US$500 million (1) 786.5 739.5 802.7 786.5 739.5 802.7US$500 million (1) (2) 678.5 659.5 711.2 - - -US$400 million - 525.1 559.2 - - -€700 million (1) (2) 1,076.8 1,150.2 1,071.0 - - -', 'Non-cash changes: Fair value adjustments (65.4) - - - 107.8 Amortisation of bond discount 3.2 - - - - Foreign exchange movements (273.3) (58.5) (0.5) (8.5) 11.5 Acquisition of subsidiary - 31.3 8.7 - Additions of finance lease - - 4.8 - - Interest expense - - - 383.6 - Adjustment - - (78.3) - -(335.5) (27.2) (65.3) 375.1 119.3', '31. NET DEFERRED GAIN (Cont’d) NetLink Trust (“NLT”) is a business trust established as part of the Info-communications Media Development Authority of Singapore’s effective open access requirements under Singapore’s Next Generation Nationwide Broadband Network.  In prior years, Singtel had sold certain infrastructure assets, namely ducts, manholes and exchange buildings (“Assets”) to NLT. At the consolidated level, the gain on disposal of Assets recognised by Singtel is deferred in the Group’s statement of financial position and amortised over the useful lives of the Assets. The unamortised deferred gain is released to the Group’s income statement when NLT is partially or fully sold, based on the proportionate equity interest disposed.  Singtel sold its 100% interest in NLT to NetLink NBN Trust (the “Trust”) in July 2017 for cash as well as a 24.8% interest in the Trust. Net deferred gains of S$1.10 billion were correspondingly released to the Group’s income statement in the previous financial year upon this sale. Following the divestment, Singtel ceased to own units in NLT but continues to have an interest of 24.8% in the Trust which owns all the units in NLT.', 'Capital Management The Group is committed to delivering dividends that increase over time with growth in underlying earnings, while maintaining an optimal capital structure and investment grade credit ratings. The Group monitors capital based on gross and net gearing ratios. In order to achieve an optimal capital structure, the Group may adjust the amount of dividend payment, return capital to shareholders, issue new shares, buy back issued shares, obtain new borrowings or reduce its borrowings. From time to time, the Group purchases its own shares from the market. The shares purchased are primarily for delivery to employees upon vesting of performance shares awarded under Singtel performance share plans. The Group can also cancel the shares which are repurchased from the market. There were no changes in the Group’s approach to capital management during the financial year.', '2,856.6 3,346.3 2,857.6 3,347.5 During the financial year, a final one-tier tax exempt ordinary dividend of 10.7 cents per share, totalling S$1.75 billion was paid in respect of the previous financial year ended 31 March 2018. In addition, an interim one-tier tax exempt ordinary dividend of 6.8 cents per share totalling S$1.11 billion was paid in respect of the current financial year ended 31 March 2019.  The amount paid by the Group differed from that paid by the Company due to dividends on performance shares held by the Trust that were eliminated on consolidation of the Trust. The Directors have proposed a final one-tier tax exempt ordinary dividend of 10.7 cents per share, totalling approximately S$1.75 billion in respect of the current financial year ended 31 March 2019 for approval at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.  These financial statements do not reflect the above final dividend payable of approximately S$1.75 billion, which will be accounted for in the ‘Shareholders’ Equity’ as an appropriation of ‘Retained Earnings’ in the next financial year ending 31 March 2020.', '35. FAIR VALUES OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES The Group classifies fair value measurements using a fair value hierarchy which reflects the significance of the inputs used in determining the measurements. The fair value hierarchy has the following levels – (a) quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1);(b) inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 which are observable for the asset or liability, either directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from prices) (Level 2); and(c) inputs for the asset or liability which are not based on observable market data (unobservable inputs)  (Level 3).', 'Financial liabilities Group Bonds (Note 28.1) 8,726.6 6,722.9 2,402.9 - 9,125.8 Company Bonds (Note 28.1) 802.7 957.0 - - 957.0  See Note 2.16 on the basis of estimating the fair values and Note 18 for information on the derivative financial instruments used for hedging the risks associated with the borrowings. Except as disclosed in the above tables, the carrying values of other financial assets and liabilities approximate their fair values.', '36.1  Financial Risk Factors The Group’s activities are exposed to a variety of financial risks: foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk, credit risk, liquidity risk and market risk. The Group’s overall risk management seeks to minimise the potential adverse effects of these risks on the financial performance of the Group. The Group uses financial instruments such as currency forwards, cross currency and interest rate swaps, and foreign currency borrowings to hedge certain financial risk exposures. No financial derivatives are held or sold for speculative purposes. The Directors assume responsibility for the overall financial risk management of the Group. For the financial year ended 31 March 2019, the Risk Committee and Finance and Investment Committee (“FIC”), which are committees of the Board, assisted the Directors in reviewing and establishing policies relating to financial risk management in accordance with the policies and directives of the Directors.', '36.2  Foreign Exchange Risk The foreign exchange risk of the Group arises from subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures operating in foreign countries, mainly Australia, India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and the United States of America. Additionally, the Group’s joint venture in India, Bharti Airtel Limited, is primarily exposed to foreign exchange risks from its operations in Sri Lanka and 14 countries across Africa. Translation risks of overseas net investments are not hedged unless approved by the FIC.  The Group has borrowings denominated in foreign currencies that have primarily been hedged into the functional currency of the respective borrowing entities using cross currency swaps in order to reduce the foreign currency exposure on these borrowings. As the hedges are intended to be perfect, any change in the fair value of the cross currency swaps has minimal impact on profit and equity.  The Group Treasury Policy, as approved by the FIC, is to substantially hedge all known transactional currency exposures. The Group generates revenue, receives foreign dividends and incurs costs in currencies which are other than the functional currencies of the operating units, thus giving rise to foreign exchange risk. The currency exposures are primarily for the Australian Dollar, Euro, Hong Kong Dollar, Indian Rupee, Indonesian Rupiah, Philippine Peso, Pound Sterling, Thai Baht, United States Dollar and Japanese Yen.  Foreign currency purchases and forward currency contracts are used to reduce the Group’s transactional exposure to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. The foreign exchange difference on trade balances is disclosed under Note 6 and the foreign exchange difference on non-trade balances is disclosed under Note 10.', '36.2  Foreign Exchange Risk (Cont’d) The critical terms (i.e. the notional amount, maturity and underlying) of the derivative financial instruments and  their corresponding hedged items are the same. The Group performs a qualitative assessment of effectiveness  and it is expected that derivative financial instruments and the value of the corresponding hedged items will systematically change in opposite direction in response to movements in the underlying exchange rates. The main source of hedge ineffectiveness in these hedging relationships is the effect of the counterparty and the  Group’s own credit risk on the fair value of the derivative financial instruments, which is not reflected in the  fair value of the hedged items attributable to changes in foreign currency rates. No other source of ineffectiveness emerged from these hedging relationships. All hedge relationships remain effective and there is no hedge relationship in which hedge accounting is no  longer applied.', '36.3 Interest Rate Risk (Cont’d)  Interest rate swap contracts paying floating rate interest amounts are designated and effective as fair value  hedges of interest rate movements. During the year, the hedge was fully effective in hedging the fair value  exposure to interest rate movements. The carrying amount of the bond decreased by S$23.5 million which  was included in the income statement at the same time that the fair value of the interest rate swap was included  in the income statement. As at 31 March 2019, S$2.54 billion of borrowings was designated in fair value hedge relationships. All hedge relationships remained effective and there was no hedge relationship in which hedge accounting could no longer be applied.', '36.4 Credit Risk Financial assets that potentially subject the Group to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of trade receivables, contract assets, cash and cash equivalents and financial instruments used in hedging activities. The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk from trade receivables and contract assets due to its  diverse customer base. Credit risk is managed through the application of credit assessment and approvals, credit limits and monitoring procedures. Where appropriate, the Group obtains deposits or bank guarantees from customers or enters into credit insurance arrangements. The Group’s exposure to credit risk and the measurement bases used to determine expected credit losses is disclosed in Note 16. The Group places its cash and cash equivalents with a number of major commercial banks and other financial institutions with high credit ratings. Derivative counter-parties are limited to high credit rating commercial banks and other financial institutions. The Group has policies that limit the financial exposure to any one financial institution.', '36.5 Liquidity Risk To manage liquidity risk, the Group monitors and maintains a level of cash and cash equivalents deemed  adequate by the management to finance the Group’s operations and to mitigate the effects of fluctuations  in cash flows. Due to the dynamic nature of the underlying business, the Group aims at maintaining funding  flexibility with adequate committed and uncommitted credit lines available to ensure that the Group is able to  meet the short-term obligations of the Group as they fall due.  The maturity profile of the Group’s borrowings and related swaps based on expected contractual undiscounted cash flows is disclosed in Note 28.5.', '37. SEGMENT INFORMATION Segment information is presented based on the information reviewed by senior management for performance measurement and resource allocation. Singtel Group is organised by three business segments, Group Consumer, Group Enterprise and Group Digital Life. Group Consumer comprises the consumer businesses across Singapore and Australia, as well as the Group’s investments, mainly AIS and Intouch (which has an equity interest of 40.5% in AIS) in Thailand, Airtel in India,  Africa and Sri Lanka, Globe in the Philippines, and Telkomsel in Indonesia. It focuses on driving greater value  and performance from the core carriage business including mobile, pay TV, fixed broadband and voice,  as well as equipment sales.  Group Enterprise comprises the business groups across Singapore, Australia, the United States of America,  Europe and the region, and focuses on growing the Group’s position in the enterprise markets. Key services include mobile, equipment sales, fixed voice and data, managed services, cloud computing, cyber security, IT services  and professional consulting. Group Digital Life (“GDL”) focuses on using the latest Internet technologies and assets of the Group’s operating companies to develop new revenue and growth engines by entering into adjacent businesses where it has a competitive advantage. It focuses on three key businesses in digital life – digital marketing (Amobee), regional premium over-the-top video (HOOQ) and advanced analytics and intelligence capabilities (DataSpark), in addition to strengthening its role as Singtel’s digital innovation engine through Innov8.  Corporate comprises the costs of Group functions not allocated to the business segments.  The measurement of segment results which is before exceptional items, is in line with the basis of information presented to management for internal management reporting purposes.  The costs of shared and common infrastructure are allocated to the business segments using established methodologies.', 'Operating revenue 9,818.6 6,329.3 1,223.8 - 17,371.7Operating expenses (6,803.9) (4,701.7) (1,315.2) (83.7) (12,904.5)Other income/ (expense) 151.6 67.6 (0.3) 5.8 224.7Earnings before interest,  tax, depreciation and  amortisation (“EBITDA”) 3,166.3 1,695.2 (91.7) (77.9) 4,691.9      Share of pre-tax results of associates and joint ventures      - Airtel (511.2) - - - (511.2)- Telkomsel 1,128.3 - - - 1,128.3- Globe 367.8 - - - 367.8- AIS 343.2 - - - 343.2- Intouch 96.1 - - - 96.1- Others 1.0 - - 110.7 111.7 1,425.2 - - 110.7 1,535.9', 'EBITDA and share of pre-tax results of associates and joint ventures 4,591.5 1,695.2 (91.7) 32.8 6,227.8      Depreciation and amortisation (1,544.5) (614.8) (60.3) (2.6) (2,222.2)Earnings before interest and  tax (“EBIT”) 3,047.0 1,080.4 (152.0) 30.2 4,005.6      Segment assets      Investment in associates and  joint ventures      - Airtel 7,420.4 - - - 7,420.4- Telkomsel 3,313.0 - - - 3,313.0- Globe 1,175.7 - - - 1,175.7- AIS 864.0 - - - 864.0- Intouch 1,701.6 - - - 1,701.6- Others 24.3 - - 419.1 443.4 14,499.0 - - 419.1 14,918.1  Goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries 9,190.0 1,211.0 1,137.3 - 11,538.3Other assets 13,512.4 5,705.6 949.0 2,291.4 22,458.4       37,201.4 6,916.6 2,086.3 2,710.5 48,914.8', 'Operating revenue 9,711.0 6,476.7 1,080.3 - 17,268.0Operating expenses (6,595.5) (4,658.1) (1,133.4) (89.3) (12,476.3)Other income 206.9 44.8 1.8 5.3 258.8      EBITDA 3,322.4 1,863.4 (51.3) (84.0) 5,050.5      Share of pre-tax results of associates and joint ventures      - Airtel 199.3 - - - 199.3- Telkomsel 1,372.4 - - - 1,372.4- Globe 289.1 - - - 289.1- AIS 347.4 - - - 347.4- Intouch 103.0 - - - 103.0- Others 0.9 - - 148.7 149.6 2,312.1 - - 148.7 2,460.8     EBITDA and share of pre-tax results of associates and joint ventures 5,634.5 1,863.4 (51.3) 64.7 7,511.3      Depreciation and amortisation (1,571.9) (607.8) (69.1) (1.2) (2,250.0)      EBIT 4,062.6 1,255.6 (120.4) 63.5 5,261.3      Segment assets      Investment in associates and  joint ventures      - Airtel 7,453.1 - - - 7,453.1- Telkomsel 3,416.1 - - - 3,416.1- Globe 1,054.4 - - - 1,054.4- AIS 775.7 - - - 775.7- Intouch 1,641.2 - - - 1,641.2- Others 23.6 - - 422.6 446.2 14,364.1 - - 422.6 14,786.7 Goodwill on acquisition of subsidiaries 9,192.9 1,167.5 1,011.8 - 11,372.2Other assets 13,742.3 5,844.7 725.6 2,024.0 22,336.6       37,299.3 7,012.2 1,737.4 2,446.6 48,495.5', 'EBIT 4,005.6 5,261.3   Share of exceptional items of associates and joint ventures (post-tax) 301.1 (16.7) Share of tax expense of associates and joint ventures (274.3) (640.1) Exceptional items 68.2 1,895.1  Profit before interest, investment income (net) and tax 4,100.6 6,499.6 Interest and investment income (net) 38.1 45.5 Finance costs (392.8) (390.2)', '38% (2018: 38%) and 52% (2018: 52%) of the total revenue for the financial year ended 31 March 2019, with the remaining 10% (2018: 10%) from the United States of America and other countries where the Group operates in. The geographical information on the Group’s non-current assets is not presented as it is not used for segmental reporting purposes. The Group has a large and diversified customer base which consists of individuals and corporations. There was no single customer that contributed 10% or more of the Group’s revenue for the financial years ended 31 March 2019 and 31 March 2018.', '38. OPERATING LEASE COMMITMENTS As at 31 March 2019, the future aggregate lease payments for the remaining lease periods (including renewal periods where the Group is reasonably certain to exercise the renewals) under operating leases but not recognised as liabilities, were as follows:  GroupS$ Mil CompanyS$ MilNot later than one year 430.2 82.5Later than one but not later than five years 1,517.0 308.5Later than five years 1,471.1 495.6    3,418.3 886.6', '39.2 As at 31 March 2019, the Group’s commitments for the purchase of broadcasting programme rights were  S$926 million (31 March 2018: S$693 million). The commitments included only the minimum guaranteed  amounts payable under the respective contracts and did not include amounts that may be payable based on revenue share arrangement which cannot be reliably determined as at the end of the reporting period.', '39.3 On 7 March 2019, Singtel announced that it will subscribe to Airtel’s rights issue based on its rights entitlement  for its direct stake of 15%. The total consideration for the subscription is approximately S$735 million. The rights  issue will close on 17 May 2019 and is expected to complete in early June 2019.', 'As at 31 March 2019, (i) The Group and Company provided bankers’ and other guarantees, and insurance bonds of  S$592.4 million and S$109.1 million (31 March 2018: S$570.4 million and S$146.4 million) respectively.(ii) The Company provided guarantees for loans of S$1.24 billion (31 March 2018: S$1.18 billion) drawn down under various loan facilities entered into by Singtel Group Treasury Pte. Ltd. (“SGT”), a wholly- owned subsidiary, with maturities between December 2019 and September 2021.(iii) The Company provided guarantees for SGT’s notes issue of an aggregate equivalent amount of  S$3.95 billion (31 March 2018: S$4.04 billion) due between April 2020 and August 2028.(b) In 2016 and 2017, Singapore Telecom Australia Investments Pty Limited (“STAI”) received amended assessments from the Australian Taxation Office (“ATO”) in connection with the acquisition financing of Optus. The assessments comprised primary tax of A$268 million, interest of A$58 million and penalties of  A$67 million. STAI’s holding company, Singtel Australia Investment Ltd, would be entitled to refund of withholding tax estimated at A$89 million. STAI has objected to the amended assessments. In accordance with the ATO administrative practice, STAI paid a minimum amount of 50% of the assessed primary tax on  21 November 2016. This payment continued to be recognised as a receivable as at 31 March 2019. In December 2018, Singtel Group received additional assessments amounting to S$120 million from the Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore for reduction in group relief claims in Year of Assessment 2014. Singtel has objected to the additional assessments. The final payment due date has not been indicated by the Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore. The Group has received advice from external experts in relation to the above matters and will vigorously defend its position. Accordingly, no provision has been made as at 31 March 2019.', '41. SIGNIFICANT CONTINGENT LIABILITIES OF ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES (Cont’d) In March 2018, CAT demanded DPC to transfer the telecommunications systems which would have been supplied under the Concession Agreement between CAT and DPC of THB 13.4 billion (S$573 million) or to pay the same amount plus interest. This case is pending arbitration. In September 2018, TOT demanded that AIS pays additional revenue share from disputes on roaming rates from July 2013 to September 2015, amounting to THB 16.3 billion (S$694 million).  As at 31 March 2019, there are a number of other claims against AIS and its subsidiaries amounting to', 'SFRS(I) 1, First-time Adoption of Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (International) The Group has made the following adjustments to the opening statement of financial position as at 1 April 2017 arising from the transition options: (a) The cumulative currency translation loss of the Group has been transferred to retained earnings. (b) Fair value has been used as the ‘deemed cost’ for certain property, plant and equipment.', 'SFRS(I) 9, Financial Instruments SFRS(I) 9 introduces new requirements for classification and measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities, general hedge accounting and impairment requirements for financial assets. Equity investments previously accounted for as ‘Available-For-Sale’ (AFS) investments are accounted for as ‘Fair Value through Other Comprehensive Income’ (FVOCI) investments. Lifetime expected credit losses are recognised for trade receivables and contract assets.', 'SFRS(I) 15, Revenue from Contracts with Customers SFRS(I) 15 establishes a single comprehensive model of accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. The standard requires companies to apportion revenue earned from contracts to performance obligations based on a five-step model on a relative standalone selling price basis. It also introduces new contract cost guidance and requires certain additional disclosures.  The Group has applied the retrospective method in the initial application of SFRS(I) 15, including the use of  practical expedients. Contracts that ended before 1 April 2017 (the first comparative reporting period) were not restated. The adoption of SFRS(I) 15 resulted in the following key effects at the consolidated level:(a) An increase in revenue allocated to sales of equipment, which are based on their relative standalone selling prices, and a reduction in mobile service revenue over the customer contract term. (b) An increase in cost of sales and a reduction in mobile customer acquisition costs.(c) Commission paid to dealers and own sales force are capitalised and amortised as operating expenses over the customer contract term in the income statement. Capitalised contract costs are included in ‘Other assets’ under non-current assets. (d) An increase in contract assets, comprising mainly unbilled equipment receivables arising from upfront recognition of revenue from sales of equipment. Contract assets are included in ‘Trade and other receivables’ under current assets as they are expected to be realised in the normal operating cycle. (e) An increase in contract liabilities, comprising mainly deferred revenue in respect of mobile price  plan discount vouchers given. Contract liabilities are included in ‘Trade and other payables’ under current liabilities.  There are no material differences between the consolidated statement of cash flows presented under SFRS(I)  and FRS.', '42. RECONCILIATIONS OF PROFIT, COMPREHENSIVE INCOME AND EQUITY (Cont’d) The tables below summarised the impact of adopting SFRS(I) 1, SFRS(I) 9 and SFRS(I) 15 for the previous financial year ended, and as at 31 March 2018 and 1 April 2017. Income statement for the financial year ended 31 March 2018', 'Operating revenue 17,531.8 (263.8) 17,268.0Operating expenses (12,701.5) 225.2 (12,476.3)Other income 258.8 - 258.8    5,089.1 (38.6) 5,050.5   Depreciation and amortisation (2,340.1) 90.1 (2,250.0)    2,749.0 51.5 2,800.5   Exceptional items 1,940.4 (45.3) 1,895.1   Profit on operating activities 4,689.4 6.2 4,695.6   Share of results of associates and joint ventures 1,786.7 17.3 1,804.0   Profit before interest, investment income (net) and tax 6,476.1 23.5 6,499.6   Interest and investment income (net) 45.6 (0.1) 45.5Finance costs (390.2) - (390.2)   Profit before tax 6,131.5 23.4 6,154.9   Tax expense (701.2) (1.8) (703.0)    Profit after tax 5,430.3 21.6 5,451.9   Attributable to:   Shareholders of the Company 5,451.4 21.6 5,473.0Non-controlling interests (21.1) - (21.1)     5,430.3 21.6 5,451.9    Earnings per share attributable to shareholders of the Company    - basic 33.40¢  33.53¢ - diluted 33.35¢ 33.48¢  Statement of comprehensive income for the financial year ended 31 March 2018', '5,980.9 777.7 6,758.6Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 11,800.8 (346.7) 11,454.1Intangible assets 13,969.1 - 13,969.1Joint ventures 12,782.6 3.9 12,786.5Associates 2,005.5 (5.3) 2,000.2Available-for-sale investments 197.9 (197.9) -Fair value through other comprehensive income investments - 197.9 197.9Derivative financial instruments 409.6 (21.3) 388.3Deferred tax assets 360.1 (7.1) 353.0Trade and other receivables 747.2 (747.2) -Other assets - 587.8 587.8 42,272.8 (535.9) 41,736.9    Total assets 48,253.7 241.8 48,495.5    Current liabilities   Trade and other payables 5,233.9 137.1 5,371.0Advance billings 794.1 - 794.1Current tax liabilities 351.3 - 351.3Borrowings (unsecured) 1,800.5 - 1,800.5Borrowings (secured) 23.1 - 23.1Derivative financial instruments 70.0 (0.7) 69.3Net deferred gain 20.1 - 20.1 8,293.0 136.4 8,429.4Non-current liabilities    Advance billings 225.1 (3.5) 221.6Borrowings (unsecured) 8,525.1 61.0 8,586.1Borrowings (secured) 81.5 - 81.5Derivative financial instruments 302.2 (25.2) 277.0Net deferred gain 357.7 - 357.7Deferred tax liabilities 520.4 15.2 535.6Other non-current liabilities 295.1 - 295.1 10,307.1 47.5 10,354.6    Total liabilities 18,600.1 183.9 18,784.0    Net assets 29,653.6 57.9 29,711.5    Share capital and reserves    Share capital 4,127.3 - 4,127.3Reserves 25,551.9 57.9 25,609.8', '2,507.8 - 2,507.8Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 2,303.9 (44.5) 2,259.4Subsidiaries 19,425.9 - 19,425.9Joint ventures 22.8 - 22.8Associates 24.7 - 24.7Available-for-sale investments 5.5 (5.5) -Fair value through other comprehensive income investments - 5.5 5.5Derivative financial instruments 134.1 (3.5) 130.6Trade and other receivables 143.7 (143.7) -Other assets - 144.9 144.9 22,060.6 (46.8) 22,013.8    Total assets 24,568.4 (46.8) 24,521.6    Current liabilities   Trade and other payables 1,468.4 - 1,468.4Advance billings 80.1 - 80.1Current tax liabilities 101.5 - 101.5Borrowings (secured) 7.4 - 7.4Derivative financial instruments 84.9 - 84.9 1,742.3 - 1,742.3Non-current liabilities    Advance billings 136.7 - 136.7Borrowings (unsecured) 673.2 66.3 739.5Borrowings (secured) 68.5 - 68.5Derivative financial instruments 279.0 (28.1) 250.9Deferred tax liabilities 275.6 (7.4) 268.2Other non-current liabilities 31.4 - 31.4 1,464.4 30.8 1,495.2    Total liabilities 3,206.7 30.8 3,237.5    Net assets 21,361.7 (77.6) 21,284.1    Share capital and reserves    Share capital 4,127.3 - 4,127.3Reserves 17,234.4 (77.6) 17,156.8    Total equity 21,361.7 (77.6) 21,284.1', '5,917.5 837.0 6,754.5Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 11,892.9 (436.8) 11,456.1Intangible assets 13,072.8 - 13,072.8Joint ventures 12,282.9 2.4 12,285.3Associates 1,952.2 (5.5) 1,946.7Available-for-sale investments 192.9 (192.9) -Fair value through other comprehensive income investments - 192.9 192.9Derivative financial instruments 455.2 (20.8) 434.4Deferred tax assets 657.8 (22.9) 634.9Trade and other receivables 769.5 (769.5) -Other assets - 592.0 592.0Loan to an associate 1,100.5 - 1,100.5 42,376.7 (661.1) 41,715.6', 'Current liabilities   Trade and other payables 4,922.4 132.4 5,054.8Advance billings 835.4 25.7 861.1Current tax liabilities 296.3 - 296.3Borrowings (unsecured) 3,046.9 (0.3) 3,046.6Borrowings (secured) 86.7 - 86.7Derivative financial instruments 15.8 - 15.8Net deferred gain 68.8 - 68.8 9,272.3 157.8 9,430.1Non-current liabilities    Advance billings 245.7 (3.8) 241.9Borrowings (unsecured) 7,852.7 45.5 7,898.2Borrowings (secured) 199.6 - 199.6Derivative financial instruments 303.1 (23.7) 279.4Net deferred gain 1,282.7 - 1,282.7Deferred tax liabilities 574.6 (1.8) 572.8Other non-current liabilities 349.9 (25.7) 324.2 10,808.3 (9.5) 10,798.8', '1,893.4 (1.2) 1,892.2Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 2,326.5 (59.9) 2,266.6Subsidiaries 17,441.0 - 17,441.0Joint ventures 23.0 - 23.0Associates 603.5 - 603.5Available-for-sale investments 37.4 (37.4) -Fair value through other comprehensive income investments - 37.4 37.4Derivative financial instruments 284.9 (1.4) 283.5Trade and other receivables 155.1 (155.1) -Other assets - 161.0 161.0Loan to an associate 1,100.5 - 1,100.5 21,971.9 (55.4) 21,916.5    Total assets 23,865.3 (56.6) 23,808.7    Current liabilities   Trade and other payables 1,602.0 - 1,602.0Advance billings 74.8 - 74.8Current tax liabilities 100.6 - 100.6Borrowings (secured) 1.5 - 1.5Derivative financial instruments 110.0 (1.2) 108.8 1,888.9 (1.2) 1,887.7Non-current liabilities    Advance billings 138.3 - 138.3Borrowings (unsecured) 746.2 56.5 802.7Borrowings (secured) 157.2 - 157.2Derivative financial instruments 370.0 (26.0) 344.0Deferred tax liabilities 282.2 (9.2) 273.0Other non-current liabilities 23.7 - 23.7 1,717.6 21.3 1,738.9    Total liabilities 3,606.5 20.1 3,626.6    Net assets 20,258.8 (76.7) 20,182.1    Share capital and reserves    Share capital 4,127.3 - 4,127.3Reserves 16,131.5 (76.7) 16,054.8    Total equity 20,258.8 (76.7) 20,182.1', 'Notes:(1) The place of business of the associates are the same as their country of incorporation.(2) The company has been equity accounted for in the consolidated financial statements based on results ended, or as at, 31 December 2018, the financial year-end of the company. (3) Audited by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Jaiyos Audit Co. Ltd, Bangkok. (4) Audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP, Singapore.', 'Group to exercise joint control with the other shareholders. (3) The company has been equity accounted for in the consolidated financial statements based on the results ended, or as at, 31 December 2018, the financial year-end of the company.(4) Audited by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Jaiyos Audit Co. Ltd, Bangkok. (5) This represents the Group’s direct interest in AIS. (6) Audited by Deloitte Haskins & Sells LLP, New Delhi. Bharti Airtel Limited has business operations in India, Sri Lanka, and 14 countries across Africa. (7) Audited by Navarro Amper & Co. (a member firm of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited).(8) The Group has a 47.1% effective economic interest in Globe.(9) The Southern Cross Cable Consortium operates through two separate companies. Southern Cross Cables Holdings Limited owns a cable network between Australia and the USA, with operations outside the USA. Pacific Carriage Holdings Limited has operations within the USA.(10) Audited by Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (a member firm of Ernst & Young).(11) Audited by KPMG, Bermuda. (12) The company has been disposed during the year.', 'Ascendas - Singbridge Pte Ltd 0.2Certis CISCO Auxiliary Police Force Pte Ltd 8.8Ensign InfoSecurity (Systems) Pte Ltd 0.1Grid Communications Pte. Ltd. 0.3HarbourFront Centre Pte Ltd 0.2Human Capital Leadership Institute 0.1Mediacorp Pte Ltd 16.0Mediacorp VizPro International Pte Ltd 0.2Nexwave Technologies Pte Ltd 0.1Power Gas Ltd 0.3PSA Corporation Ltd 0.3Radiance Communications Pte Ltd 2.5SP Digital Pte. Ltd. 0.3ST Electronics (Info-Security) Pte Ltd 3.6ST Engineering Electronics Ltd. 5.9ST Electronics (Satcom & Sensor Systems) Pte Ltd 0.3StarHub Cable Vision Ltd 36.6StarHub Ltd 7.7StarHub Mobile Pte Ltd 1.7Surbana Jurong Consultants Pte Ltd 1.4Synergy FMI Pte Ltd 0.2', 'Information requiredDisclose the following matters concerning an appointment of director.(a) Whether at any time during the last 10 years, an application or a petition under any bankruptcy law of any jurisdiction was filed against him or against a partnership of which he was a partner at the time when he was a partner or at any time within 2 years from the date he ceased to be a partner?', 'No No(b) Whether at any time during the last 10 years, an application or a petition under any law of any jurisdiction was filed against an entity (not being a partnership) of which he was a director or an equivalent person or a key executive, at the time when he was a director or an equivalent person or a key executive of that entity or at any time within 2 years from the date he ceased to be a director or an equivalent person or a key executive of that entity, for the winding up or dissolution of that entity or, where that entity is the trustee of a business trust, that business trust, on the ground of insolvency?', 'No No(e) Whether he has ever been convicted of any offence, in Singapore or elsewhere, involving a breach of any law or regulatory requirement that relates to the securities or futures industry in Singapore or elsewhere, or has been the subject of any criminal proceedings (including any pending criminal proceedings of which he is aware) for such breach?', 'No No(f) Whether at any time during the last 10 years, judgment has been entered against him in any civil proceedings in Singapore or elsewhere involving a breach of any law or regulatory requirement that relates to the securities or futures industry in Singapore or elsewhere, or a finding of fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty on his part, or he has been the subject of any civil proceedings (including any pending civil proceedings of which he is aware) involving an allegation of fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty on his part?', 'No No in connection with any matter occurring or arising during that period when he was so concerned with the entity or business trust?(k) Whether he has been the subject of any current or past investigation or disciplinary proceedings, or has been reprimanded or issued any warning, by the Monetary Authority of Singapore or any other regulatory authority, exchange, professional body or government agency, whether in Singapore or elsewhere?', 'Voting rights:On a show of hands – every member present in person and each proxy shall have one voteOn a poll – every member present in person or by proxy shall have one vote for every share he holds or represents (The Company cannot exercise any voting rights in respect of shares held by it as treasury shares or subsidiary holdings (1))', '1 Temasek Holdings (Private) Limited  8,132,818,602  49.81 2 Citibank Nominees Singapore Pte Ltd  1,890,056,474  11.58 3 DBS Nominees (Private) Limited  1,790,798,738 (2)  10.97 4 DBSN Services Pte Ltd  1,130,926,449  6.93 5 Central Provident Fund Board  829,584,324  5.08 6 HSBC (Singapore) Nominees Pte Ltd  533,816,595  3.27 7 Atrium Investments Pte Ltd  358,354,351  2.19 8 Raffles Nominees (Pte) Limited  243,974,170  1.49 9 BPSS Nominees Singapore (Pte.) Ltd.  97,626,252  0.60 10 United Overseas Bank Nominees (Private) Limited  63,073,194  0.39 11 OCBC Nominees Singapore Private Limited  36,708,110  0.22 12 Societe Generale Singapore Branch  26,016,159  0.16 13 Maybank Kim Eng Securities Pte Ltd  25,243,038  0.15 14 OCBC Securities Private Ltd  20,451,725  0.12 15 DB Nominees (Singapore) Pte Ltd  18,997,965  0.12 16 Phillip Securities Pte Ltd  16,878,383  0.10 17 Morgan Stanley Asia (Singapore) Securities Pte Ltd  13,559,279  0.08 18 UOB Kay Hian Pte Ltd  11,900,982  0.07 19 Merrill Lynch (Singapore) Pte Ltd  10,997,368  0.07 20 BNP Paribas Nominees Singapore Pte Ltd  10,971,140  0.07  15,262,753,298  93.47', 'Note:As at 27 May 2019, the Company had 808,005 treasury shares and no subsidiary holdings. Based on information available to the Company as at 27 May 2019,  approximately 47% of the issued ordinary shares of the Company is held by the public and, therefore, Rule 723 of the Listing Manual issued by the Singapore  Exchange Securities Trading Limited is complied with. The percentage of issued ordinary shares held by the public is calculated based on the number of issued ordinary shares of the Company as at 27 May 2019, excluding 808,005 ordinary shares held as treasury shares as at that date. The percentage of such treasury  shares against the total number of issued ordinary shares (excluding ordinary shares held as treasury shares) is 0.005%.', 'At the 26th Annual General Meeting of the Company held on 24 July 2018 (2018 AGM), the shareholders approved  the renewal of a mandate to enable the Company to purchase or otherwise acquire not more than 5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company as at the date of the 2018 AGM. As at 27 May 2019, there is no current  on-market buy-back of shares pursuant to the mandate.']"
1,starhub-annual-report-2018,"['We are pursuing a more aggressive transformation of the pay TV business model from a fixed price, linear broadcast platform to a more flexible “anywhere on any device” suite of services to support our customers’ evolving digital lifestyle needs. Already, many of our HomeHub customers prefer StarHub’s streaming services app, StarHub Go.', 'We know that people and businesses not only want a fast and reliable connection, they want a secure and private connection to the outside world. StarHub has made key investments in this area and will continue to add the necessary capabilities internally, and with corporate partners, as cyber threats evolve.', 'HOW WE CREATE VALUEAt StarHub, our journey of transformation will enable us to evolve and create value through six capitals – financial, physical, intellectual, human, social and natural. The resulting value is a spectrum of interconnecting facets, which consist of the increasingly integrated services our customers have come to expect from the StarHub brand, and effective relationships that equip, enable and empower.', 'We introduced a transformation programme to challenge and improve the way we conduct business; based on four key strategic pillars (DARE) and three vital enablers (HUB). These strategic pillars and key enablers underpin our fundamental Hubbing proposition of uniting mobile, pay TV and broadband services to deliver better value to our customers.', 'I joined StarHub because I passionately believe that our brand heralds change, innovation and better customer experiences. We live in an ever-increasing digital world and we need to inspire people around us to enjoy life and work smarter than ever before and embrace the benefits that the digital era offers to all of us.', 'Addressing customers’ experiences, we launched simplified mobile pricing plans, offering better value and innovation including unlimited local calls for prepaid customers and unlimited weekend data for our postpaid customers. Migration from “old” HFC cable to advanced fibre technology is underway to enable our StarHub TV customers to enjoy best resolution and digital delivery of services.', 'As the evolution of our operating model is a key strategic pillar, a leaner organisational structure has been introduced. We will miss the contributions from all the impacted employees who were affected by the operational efficiency programme in October 2018 to improve productivity. We have unreservedly thanked them for their past, valuable contributions to our business.', 'On the infrastructure side, the intense competitiveness of the market, new entrants, declining voice revenues, high content costs and high market penetration, mean that it is not feasible to continue building or maintain existing telecom infrastructure in isolation. We are exploring sharing network models with various interested parties, but it is too early for any tangible agreements.', 'We are addressing the realities of our pay TV business which will necessitate a refresh of our content strategy. While we continue to commit to our pay TV services, we will reshape the current business models and move towards a variable cost model. This is especially important in the face of the rapid adoption of online streaming, digital downloads and OTT services.', 'In 2018, we completed our joint venture company exercise with Temasek Holdings to launch one of Asia’s largest cyber security ventures – Ensign InfoSecurity. We have also boosted our enterprise solutioning to focus on creating better core data and connectivity products and services. We believe this will allow us to compete credibly as a key player in the growing cyber security space and more.', 'Encouraging inroads have been made in 2018 which we will accelerate in 2019. We have also forged and strengthened partnerships in areas like Smart Retail where we have been appointed by the government to support digital transformation at Kampong Glam and to offer IoT Connected Vehicle Solutions to SBS Transit to improve passenger experiences across the island.', 'Our success is largely attributed to our focus in shoring up our Managed Services portfolio and expanding that into new growth areas. In 2018, we significantly boosted our capabilities in cyber security, cloud, cryptography and digital security solutions, while also invested in adjacent areas such as digital platforms, IoT, AI, amongst others.', 'The dangers of cyber-attacks in Singapore and around the world is a real one, and enterprises have often demanded from us effective solutions that protect them against these threats. Since we started our cyber security team two years ago, we have made major advancements. Of note – the formation of the joint venture company with Temasek', 'In addition, we have continued to look into various new growth opportunities. Examples of some of these opportunities include: • Smart Retail – where we are proud to be the service provider appointed by the government to support digital transformation at Kampong Glam; • Robotics – where we have successfully made inroads at a number of hotels and the', 'MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions) industry in Singapore; • Eldercare Solutions – where, in partnership with Orange Valley Nursing Homes, we are testing several aged-care technologies with our clients in this space; and • IoT Connected Vehicles Solution – where we are working with SBS Transit to improve passenger experiences across the island.', 'Indeed, we understand the need for a seamless customer experience; hence through our MyStarHub app, we have empowered our customers to decide how they want to personalise their own plans to fit their daily consumption. We intend to keep improving our digital innovation with more features that provides further convenience for them.', 'In anticipation of greater adoption of IoT devices across Singapore, we have modernised our network to support NB-IoT. We believe these devices will help furnish critical data which the government and enterprises can use, to improve operational efficiency and facilitate their long-term planning. IoT will also advance our daily lives with connected', 'It is imperative to move beyond a Hubbing strategy. The company must move beyond the bundling of services to reflect the many changing tastes and business models in the industry. With that in mind, the creation of our Strategic Transformation programme is designed to allow StarHub to rapidly transform our operations, evolve our own internal culture and meet the challenges we face head on.', 'Corporate Developments In January 2018, following a successful two-year collaboration, Singapore Press Holdings (SPH) and StarHub renewed and deepened their strategic partnership for a further two-year term. The two companies will continue their tie-up in advertising sales, content creation and distribution, data analytics, and marketing, bringing several integrated multi-platform advertising packages to the market.', 'Starting in April 2018, StarHub Mobile postpaid customers were able to stream content on FOX+ without incurring any local data charges, allowing them to binge-watch over 10,000 hours of fresh, original and exclusive content. This is part of a collaboration between FOX Networks Group and StarHub to make the service accessible to all in Singapore.', 'ID) and International Roaming – now come free-of-charge as standard for customers of these plans. In a market first, StarHub has scrapped all one-time administrative, activation and SIM card fees as part of our drive to add value and be more transparent with our customers. Our new SIM Only plans resonated well with customers and the service take-up surpassed our expectations.', 'From 1 July 2019, we will only offer fibre broadband, pay TV and fixed voice services over the NBN and our own fibre infrastructure. The exercise provides greater flexibility in managing our fixed assets, migrates our business from a fixed cost to variable cost model, while improving service standards to our customers.', 'The HBO PAK customers will enjoy two more channels – CINEMAX and a new HBO channel dedicated to Asian movies with internationally-acclaimed titles from the region. Supreme Box Office Pack customers will also enjoy a revised lower monthly subscription price, while at the same time having the new Asian movie channel.', 'SMEs, and healthcare.available wireless network and enables customers to have a fully managed mobile hotspot. The solution also allows rich data sets to be collected about bus fleets, vehicles, and people that can be co-related for predictive transportation planning. A cloud-based managed service is applied for the ease of network control and system integration.', 'SMEs in the F&B and Retail sectors digital solutions that have been pre-integrated and configured for use as a single, seamless service at their outlets, removing the barriers of implementation cost and helping to ensure seamless interoperability between solutions. These digital solutions digitalise the common retail operations, enabling operators to improve business productivity and customer experience.', '2019 And Onwards 2018 was a busy but fruitful year. StarHub has evolved rapidly to meet the changing infocommunications landscape. We expect the same rapid pace to continue in 2019. We are confident that we can weather through our current challenges, transform our business and grow the trust and confidence of our customers.', 'We recognise that a robust and sound governance framework is vital in providing a solid foundation for sustainable long-term success of our business and value creation for our stakeholders. Our corporate governance practices and policies are built on principles of transparency, accountability and integrity. These constitute an integral part of the way we choose to do business, deliver our corporate strategy and engage with our stakeholders, thereby strengthening the trust and confidence they place in StarHub.', 'StarHub’s assets;• Regularly review the performance of Senior Management and the remuneration framework of the Board and Senior Management;• Review and approve key operational and business initiatives, major funding and investment proposals, acquisitions and divestments;• Recognise that the perceptions of key stakeholder groups affect StarHub’s reputation, identify the key stakeholder groups (which include customers, suppliers and business partners) and guide Management in StarHub’s strategy and approach in addressing the concerns of these key stakeholder groups;• Set StarHub’s values and standards (including ethical standards), to ensure that our obligations to shareholders and stakeholders are well-understood and duly met;• Provide guidance on the social, ethical and environmental impact of the Group’s activities and monitor compliance with', 'The Board has established a framework on authorisation and approval limits for capital and operating expenditure, as well as specified transactions including acquisitions and disposals of investments, procurement of goods and services, bank facilities and cheque signatories. Within this framework, the Board has set relevant authority and approval sub-limits for delegation to various', 'For matters which require the Board’s approval, the Board Committees would also recommend the course of action to the Board for its consideration and decision. Minutes of the meetings of the AC, SC and RC are also circulated to the Board for its information, while the minutes of the meetings of the NGC and', 'Naoki Wakai 6 – – – – – – 1         Notes: (1) Mr Steven Terrell Clontz was appointed as SC Chairman with effect from 1 October 2018.(2) Mr Nihal Vijaya Devadas Kaviratne CBE was appointed as lead independent Director and NGC Chairman with effect from 1 October 2018. There were no NGC meetings held in FY2018 following his appointment as NGC Chairman.(3) Ms Michelle Lee Guthrie was appointed as a member of the ERCC with effect from 7 August 2018.(4) Ms Nayantara Bali was appointed as an independent NED with effect from 6 August 2018 and a member of the SC with effect from 7 August 2018. She was also appointed as a member of the RC after FY2018, with effect from 14 February 2019.', 'She was also appointed as a member of the SC after FY2018, with effect from 31 January 2019. There were no AC meetings held in FY2018 following her appointment as a member of the AC.(6) Board ExCo meetings were called on an as and when needed basis. The first Board ExCo meeting was held in late FY2017 and was attended by all the Board', 'ExCo members.(7) Mr Liu Chee Ming stepped down as an independent NED and a member of the SC with effect from 19 April 2018. He attended all Board and SC meetings during his tenure of service in FY2018.(8) Mr Tan Tong Hai stepped down as CEO, executive Director and a member of the RC with effect from 1 May 2018. He attended all Board meetings during his tenure of service in FY2018.(9) Ms Rachel Eng Yaag Ngee stepped down as lead independent Director, NGC Chairman and a member of the AC with effect from 30 September 2018. She attended all Board, NGC and AC meetings during her tenure of service in FY2018.(10) The attendance of Mr Lionel Yeo Hung Tong is not reflected in Table 1 as he was appointed as an independent NED after FY2018, with effect from 10 January 2019.', 'All Directors are issued tablets which they can use to access the StarHub Board Portal, which provides relevant information and up-to-date guidelines and policies that will help them discharge their duties properly, including:• Board meeting information and Board papers; • Information on Directors’ statutory and other duties and responsibilities;• Contact details of the Board and Senior', 'This enables the Directors to serve effectively on and contribute to the Board. To this end, the Company Secretaries arrange internal briefings as well as external seminars and trainings for the Directors (including those conducted by StarHub’s panel of law firms and the Singapore Institute of Directors in conjunction with the SGX-ST). In addition, the Company Secretaries and members of', 'The Board consists of Directors who are business leaders and professionals of high calibre and integrity, with a broad range of core competencies and experience in enterprise and banking, accounting and finance, investment, risk management, legal, regulatory, technology, business and industry knowledge, management and strategic planning experience, as well as customer-based experience and knowledge. As a group, the Board', 'Nayantara Bali and Ms Ng Shin Ein in FY2018, the Board currently has a representation of three female Directors, out of 12 Directors. The Board refresh also reflects an improved age diversity. StarHub firmly believes that a well-balanced Board with appropriate diversity will contribute positively in overseeing the delivery of the Group’s strategy, bringing fresh perspectives and providing constructive challenges to Management. The immense network of contacts across various industries has proven invaluable to StarHub.  The individual profiles of the Directors can be found in the Board of Directors and', 'Director and the value each Director brings, including whether such Director: • is free from any interest and any business or other relationship which could, or could reasonably be perceived to, interfere with the exercise of the Director’s independent business judgement with a view to the best interests of the Group; and• has any material contractual relationship with the Group other than as a Director.', 'NED and unrelated to the CEO. He: • Leads the Board to ensure its effectiveness on all aspects of its role; • Sets the agenda and ensures that adequate time is available for discussion of all agenda items, in particular strategic issues;• Promotes a culture of openness and constructive debate at the Board level;• Ensures that the Directors receive complete, adequate and timely information. He works with the CEO in relation to the Board’s requirements for information in order to contribute effectively to the Board decision-making process;• Encourages effective communication with shareholders;• Encourages constructive relations within the Board and between the Board and', 'Clontz is regarded as non-independent under the Code in view of his executive role at ST Telemedia. However, after due consideration, the Board and the NGC are of the view that the said appointment does not interfere with the exercise of his independent business judgement or prevent him from acting objectively in the best interests of the Group in carrying out his duties. The Board and the NGC further note that Mr Clontz is not involved in the day-to-day running of the Group’s business and operations, and is independent of', 'In proposing candidates for appointment or re-election as Directors, the NGC considers several factors, including (a) the composition, the diversity and the need for progressive renewal of the Board, (b) each candidate’s competencies, commitment, contribution and performance (including attendance, preparedness, participation and candour) and (c) potential conflicts of interest. This ensures that the Board composition reflects an appropriate mix having regard to skills, experience, expertise, diversity and independence, which enables the Board to stay engaged and agile in meeting the needs of the Group.', 'Director is independent notwithstanding the existence of specific relationships or circumstances described in the Code that may potentially affect the Director’s independent status, the NGC will provide its views to the Board for the Board’s determination. The NGC will consider factors such as the Director’s independent business judgement, objectivity, integrity and conduct in acting honestly in the best interests of the Group. Conversely, the NGC has the discretion to consider that a Director is not', 'Board Committees, including the communication of the results of such evaluations to the Board; and• Review the adequacy of the Group’s corporate governance policies and as may be appropriate, recommend to the Board any proposed changes to such policies from time to time.independent even in the absence of specific relationships or circumstances described in the Code, and will similarly provide its views to the Board for the Board’s determination.', 'Directors with multiple board representations and/or other principal commitments (as defined in the Code) must ensure that they are able to devote sufficient time and attention to the affairs of StarHub to adequately carry out their duties as Directors of StarHub. The NGC has reviewed the individual performance of each Director and is satisfied that all', 'Committees, in particular: • Adequacy of the Board composition, including the Board size, the degree of Board independence and the mix and diversity of skills, knowledge and experience of the Board;• Information management and Board processes, including level and timeliness of information provided to the Board; • Integrity and corporate social responsibility of StarHub;• Managing StarHub’s performance;• Effectiveness of Board Committees; • CEO performance and succession planning;• Director development and management; and • Risk management.', 'Management provides the Directors with timely information that is relevant to matters on the agenda, save for sensitive matters to be tabled at the meeting itself. All sensitive Board materials that are communicated electronically are encrypted with passwords to safeguard their security. Throughout the financial year, the Board also receives monthly management and financial reports which provide updates on key performance indicators and a financial analysis of the', 'Group, as well as regular analysts’ reports and media articles on StarHub and the industry. Management also gives network and technology briefings to the Board from time to time. Collectively, the provision of such information enables the Directors to constantly keep abreast of key issues and developments in the industry as well as challenges and opportunities for the', 'CEO, the CFO and other key management personnel. Potential candidates for immediate, medium and long-term needs are identified each year; • Assessing and approving restricted stock awards and performance share awards under StarHub’s approved share plans, and recommending the grant of share awards to Directors and key management personnel for the', 'The ERCC’s review and recommendation process covers all aspects of remuneration, including Directors’ fees, salaries, allowances, bonuses, options, share-based incentives and awards, as well as benefits-in-kind. The framework and packages are linked to:• The performance of the Group and the relevant individual; • Industry practices and compensation norms; and• The need to attract key management personnel in order to ensure the continuing development of talent and the renewal of strong leadership for', 'With regards to the CEO and key management personnel, the ERCC ensures that the remuneration paid to them is closely linked to the achievement of business and individual performance targets. The performance targets are determined by the ERCC based on realistic yet stretch levels each year to motivate them to achieve a high degree of business performance with emphasis on both short and long-term quantifiable objectives.', 'CEO is present at all ERCC discussions on the compensation and incentive policies for StarHub’s key staff (such as share awards, bonus framework, salary and other incentive schemes), save for discussions which relate to the CEO’s own compensation, terms and conditions of service or the review of his performance, for which he absents himself.', 'Stock Plan, the share awards are granted as fully-paid StarHub shares without any vesting conditions attached. Nonetheless, in order to encourage the alignment of the interests of the NEDs and shareholders, NEDs who receive the share awards are required to hold a minimum number of StarHub shares with a value equivalent to the lower of (a) their prevailing annual basic retainer fee or (b) the aggregate of', 'Liu Chee Ming(j) 22,904.00 9,816.00 32,720.00(a) The total remuneration of the NEDs takes into account the 10% voluntary fee reduction. (b) Mr Steven Terrell Clontz was appointed as SC Chairman with effect from 1 October 2018.(c) Mr Nihal Vijaya Devadas Kaviratne CBE was appointed as lead ID and NGC Chairman with effect from 1 October 2018.(d) Fees are payable to Director’s employer company. (e) Ms Michelle Lee Guthrie was appointed as a member of the ERCC with effect from 7 August 2018.', '62(f) Ms Nayantara Bali was appointed as an independent NED with effect from 6 August 2018 and a member of the SC with effect from 7 August 2018. She was also appointed as a member of the RC after FY2018, with effect from 14 February 2019.(g) Ms Ng Shin Ein was appointed as an independent NED with effect from 17 September 2018 and a member of the AC with effect from 5 December 2018. She was also appointed as a member of the SC after FY2018, with effect from 31 January 2019.(h) Mr Naoki Wakai had declined the share award. He will only receive the cash component of his remuneration. Mr Wakai does not hold any StarHub shares.(i) Ms Rachel Eng Yaag Ngee stepped down as lead ID, NGC Chairman and a member of the AC with effect from 30 September 2018.(j)  Mr Liu Chee Ming stepped down as an independent NED and a member of the SC with effect from 19 April 2018.(k)  Mr Tan Tong Hai stepped down as CEO, executive Director and a member of the RC with effect from 1 May 2018. During his tenure of service in 2018, Mr Tan was remunerated as a key management personnel of StarHub and did not receive Directors’ fees for his Board directorship with StarHub. Refer to page 65 of this report for details of his remuneration for FY2018 as the former CEO of StarHub.(l)   No fees are payable to Mr Lionel Yeo Hung Tong for FY2018 as he was appointed as an independent NED after FY2018, with effect from 10 January 2019. Details of the share awards granted by StarHub to the NEDs under the StarHub Restricted Stock Plan can be found in the Directors’ Statement section on page 146 of the Annual Report.', 'Group are set at the beginning of each financial year, and are cascaded down to a select group of key management personnel using scorecards, creating alignment between the performance of the Group and the individual. While the performance objectives are different for each executive, they are assessed on the same principles across the following four broad categories of targets: • Business; • Customer; • Process; and • People. The target AVB for the CEO and key management personnel is pre-set at a fixed percentage of their annual base salary, and subsequently adjusted based on the Group’s performance at the end of each financial year. The final', 'AVB payout can range from 0 to 1.5 times of the target AVB. EVA Incentive Plan (EIP) The EIP rewards employees for sustainable shareholder value creation over the medium-term, achieved by growing profits, deploying capital efficiently as well as managing the risk profile and risk time horizon of the Group’s business.', 'A portion of the annual performance-related bonus of key management personnel is tied to the EVA achieved by the Group in the financial year. Under the EIP, a notional EVA bank account is set up for each key management personnel, into which the annual EVA performance bonus declared and earned by him for each year is credited. One-third of the accumulated EVA performance bonus, comprising the EVA performance bonus declared for the current financial year and the balance brought forward from preceding financial years, is paid out in cash each financial year. The remaining two-thirds are carried', 'C. Share-based Compensation: StarHub Performance Share Plan (PSP) The PSP serves as a long-term incentive to motivate key management personnel to strive for superior performance and to align their interests with that of shareholders.  Pursuant to the PSP, the ERCC has decided to grant contingent awards of StarHub shares on an annual basis, conditional on meeting targets set for a three-year performance period. The performance measures used in', 'FY2016 based on the performance period from 2016 to 2018.  StarHub Restricted Stock Plan (RSP) The RSP has been established with the objective of motivating managers and key talent to strive for sustained long-term growth and superior performance of the Group. It also aims to foster a share ownership culture among employees within the Group and to better align employees’ incentives with shareholders’ interests. Pursuant to the RSP, the ERCC has decided to grant contingent awards of StarHub shares on an annual basis, conditional on the achievement of annual performance targets. The objectives are aligned to the overall strategic, financial and operational goals of the Group.  A minimum threshold performance is required for any StarHub shares to be released to the recipient at the end of the performance period.', 'The actual number of StarHub shares released will depend on the achievement of the pre-determined target performance levels over the performance period, to be determined by the ERCC at the end of the performance period and capped at 1.0 times of the conditional award. The StarHub shares will be released in three tranches of 50%, 25% and 25% over three consecutive years.  The Group has attained an achievement factor which is reflective of meeting the pre-determined target performance levels for RSP awards granted in', 'D.  Market-related Benefits: The benefits provided are comparable with local market practices. Remuneration of the CEO and Top Five Key Management Personnel The details of the remuneration of the CEO and the top five key management personnel (who are not Directors or the CEO) are set out in Table 3 below (in bands of $250,000 and percentage terms) for the services rendered by them to the Group for FY2018.', 'October 2018 for Mr Peter Kaliaropoulos.(2) Variable refers to any applicable one-off incentive payments as well as incentives paid and accrued for the year pursuant to the AVB scheme and EIP for FY2018. (3) Benefits are stated on the basis of direct costs to StarHub, and include housing and other non-cash benefits such as leave, medical scheme and club membership.(4) Share awards granted under the RSP and the PSP are subject to pre-determined performance targets set over one-year and three-year performance periods respectively. The figures shown are based on the fair value of the StarHub shares at 100% of each of the RSP and PSP conditional awards, which may not be indicative of the actual value at vesting which can range from 0% to 100% of the RSP conditional award and 0% to 150% of the PSP conditional award. Over the last five financial years ended 31 December 2014 to 31 December 2018, the average number of StarHub shares vested to participants of the RSP and the PSP has been less than 100% of the conditional awards granted. Time-based share awards with a vesting period of one year were also granted under the RSP. (5) Refers to total remuneration including contingent shares granted but not vested, subject to performance.(6) Remuneration bands: “A” refers to remuneration between $250,001 and $500,000 per annum “B” refers to remuneration between $500,001 and $750,000 per annum “C” refers to remuneration between $750,001 and $1,000,000 per annum “D” refers to remuneration between $1,250,001 and $1,500,000 per annum “E” refers to remuneration between $1,500,001 and $1,750,000 per annum (a) Mr Peter Kaliaropoulos joined StarHub with effect from 9 July 2018. Accordingly, the amount of actual compensation received was based on the period from', 'StarHub shares.(b) Mr Johan Buse joined StarHub with effect from 11 September 2018. Accordingly, the amount of actual compensation received was based on the period from 11 September 2018 to 31 December 2018.  (c) Mr Tan Tong Hai stepped down as CEO with effect from 1 May 2018. During his employment with StarHub from 1 January 2018 to 30 April 2018, the total compensation was $1,312,369 (comprising fixed and variable remuneration, benefits-in-kind and contingent shares granted but not vested, subject to performance) for services rendered in all capacities to the Group. The total compensation paid (including shares vested based on actual performance) was $1,634,885. Upon Mr Tan’s departure, he was awarded a package of $1,312,158 in recognition of his contribution to the Group. The outstanding conditional share awards granted to Mr Tan under the RSP and the PSP will continue to be vested to Mr Tan on a pro-rated basis according to the stipulated vesting schedule, based on the actual level of performance achievement. (d) Ms Jeannie Ong stepped down as Chief Strategic Partnership Officer with effect from 1 January 2019. During her employment with StarHub from 1 January', '2018 to 31 December 2018, the total compensation (including fixed and variable remuneration, benefits-in-kind and contingent shares granted but not vested, subject to performance) for services rendered to the Group was within remuneration band “D”. The total compensation paid (including shares vested based on actual performance and the package awarded upon her departure in recognition of her contribution to the Group) was within remuneration band “E”. The outstanding conditional share awards granted to Ms Ong under the PSP in 2017 will continue to be vested to Ms Ong on a pro-rated basis according to the stipulated vesting schedule, based on the actual level of performance achievement.', 'Membership• Mr Steven Terrell Clontz, SC Chairman and non-executive Chairman of the Board • Mr Nihal Vijaya Devadas Kaviratne CBE, lead independent Director• Mr Stephen Geoffrey Miller, non-executive Director• Ms Michelle Lee Guthrie, independent Director• Ms Nayantara Bali, independent Director• Ms Ng Shin Ein, independent Director (appointed with effect from 31 January 2019)• Mr Lim Ming Seong, non-executive Director• Mr Peter Kaliaropoulos, co-opted SC member • Mr Nikhil O. J. Eapen, co-opted SC member', 'Key Responsibilities• Identifying and assessing significant intermediate and long-term opportunities (in terms of new frontiers of organic and inorganic growth) as well as threats in the Group’s business areas and operations (including technology, competition, regulatory and financial) and the industry; and • Providing constructive input and recommendations to the Board on any strategic matter reviewed by the SC which requires the Board’s approval.', 'StarHub (including the CEO) is involved in fraud or misconduct, which results in a re-statement of StarHub’s financial results or financial loss to StarHub, the Board may reclaim the unvested components of remuneration from such individual under all incentive plans for the relevant period, to the extent such incentive has been earned but not yet released or disbursed.', 'NEDs, one co-opted member who is independent of Management, and the CEO as an additional co-opted member. The SC members possess deep knowledge of the converging info-communications and media industries in which the Group is operating in, and collectively have relevant expertise and experience in finance, mergers and acquisitions, legal, regulatory, technical, management, consumer enterprise and strategic planning experience. This enables the SC to fulfil its oversight responsibilities relating to the Group’s intermediate and long-term strategy development and implementation.', 'Group’s strategic plan is developed with measurable goals and time targets, and is appropriately implemented. It reviews both organic and inorganic growth opportunities, and evaluates the impact of external developments and factors on the Group’s strategy and execution, such as emerging or evolving competitive activity, disruptive technologies and regulatory developments, thereby enabling the Group to adjust its strategic plan as necessary.', 'Group undertakes in achieving its business strategy, and the appropriate risk management framework and policies for managing StarHub’s risk;• Provide oversight in the design, implementation and monitoring of the risk management framework, the system of internal controls (including operational, compliance and information technology controls), and to ensure that Management puts in place action plans to mitigate the identified risks where possible;• Review the adequacy and effectiveness of StarHub’s risk management system and system of internal controls (including operational, compliance and information technology controls);• Review the adequacy and effectiveness of policies and procedures for timely risk identification and remediation, including disclosure requirements for regulatory compliance;• Provide guidance on sustainability topics to be identified as material to the business and ensures the alignment and integration of our sustainability strategy and approach with our business model; and • Set and instill in StarHub an appropriate risk-aware culture for effective risk governance.', 'The Board is principally responsible for the governance of risk management and internal controls of the Group. The RC and the AC work closely to assist the Board in the discharge of this oversight responsibility. To this end, the Board has established and maintains a sound system of risk management and internal controls to safeguard shareholders’ interests and the', 'FY2018, the RC held two meetings. The RC has authority to investigate any matter within its Terms of Reference, and has full access to and co-operation from Management. The RC also has full discretion to invite any Director or executive officer to attend its meetings, and to require Management to provide it with reasonable resources to enable it to discharge its functions properly.', 'The MRC also proactively identifies existing and emerging significant risks and manages them at the enterprise level within StarHub on an ongoing basis. Additionally, the MRC also maintains oversight over issues pertaining to cyber security, data ethics and governance, and sustainability. The MRC reports to the RC on a regular basis. Further details on StarHub’s approach to sustainability can be found in the', 'Based on the risk management system and internal controls established and maintained by the Group, the reviews performed by Management as supported by audit findings of the external and internal auditors and the relevant written assurance from the CEO and the CFO, the Board (with the concurrence of the RC and the AC) is of the opinion that the risk management system and internal controls of the Group are adequate and effective to address the financial, operational, compliance and information technology risks as well as the risk management objectives which the', 'The Board notes that the risk management system and internal controls of the Group provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance that the Group will not be adversely affected by any event that can be reasonably foreseen as it strives to achieve its business objectives. In this regard, the Board also notes that there is no risk management system and internal controls that can provide absolute assurance in this regard or against the occurrence of material errors, poor judgement in decision-making, human error, losses, fraud or other irregularities.  Further details on StarHub’s approach to enterprise risk management can be found in the Risk Management section on pages 90 to', 'Key Responsibilities• Reviewing and approving quarterly and year-end financial results announcements and financial statements, before recommending to the Board for approval;• Monitoring compliance with relevant statutory and listing requirements to ensure the integrity of the Group’s financial statements, including the relevance and consistency of the accounting principles adopted;• Reviewing and reporting to the Board at least annually on the adequacy and effectiveness of StarHub’s internal controls (including financial controls, operational controls which impact financial controls, compliance with accounting and listing rules and regulations, as well as information technology controls relating to financial systems);• Reviewing the adequacy, effectiveness and independence of the Group’s internal audit function;• Reviewing the adequacy, effectiveness, scope and results of the external audit, and the independence and objectivity of the external auditors (taking into account the nature, extent and cost of non-audit services provided by the external auditors during the financial year);• Reviewing interested person transactions to ensure compliance with the SGX-ST', 'Listing Manual and the Shareholders’ Mandate for Interested Person Transactions that is renewable annually;• Making recommendations to the Board on the proposals to shareholders for the appointment, re-appointment and removal of the external auditors, and approving the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditors;• Commissioning and reviewing findings of internal investigations into suspected fraud, irregularity, failure of internal controls or violation of any law that is likely to have a material impact on the Group’s results; and• Reviewing reports made under StarHub’s Whistle Blowing Policy, and where appropriate, directing the investigation of such matters and any follow-up actions to be taken.', 'AC members are appropriately qualified to discharge their responsibilities and collectively have strong accounting and related financial and legal management expertise and experience. They keep abreast of changes to accounting standards and issues which affect the Group through, inter alia, consultation with the external and internal auditors and seminars (including those organised by the', 'FY2018 are key areas of Management’s estimates and judgement applied for key financial issues, including (a) revenue recognition, (b) accruals, (c) acquisition of D’Crypt Pte Ltd (DPL) - purchase price allocation, (d) impairment assessment of goodwill and (e) valuation of investment in subsidiaries. During FY2018, the AC received updates from Management on the status of these areas, reviewed and discussed with the external auditors on the results of their audit, including their findings on the key areas of audit focus.', 'CORPORATE GOVERNANCE(Cont’d)in deriving accruals, the appropriateness of the assumptions and estimates made in goodwill impairment assessment and valuation of investment in subsidiaries, as well as the key assumptions applied in purchase price allocation in the valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquisition of DPL. In addition to the views from the external auditors, subject matter experts, such as independent valuers, were consulted where necessary. The AC concluded that Management’s accounting treatment and estimates in each of the KAMs were appropriate. Significant matters that were discussed with Management and the external auditors have been included as KAMs in the', 'AC members) or Senior Management is or has in the past two years been a former partner, director or employee of the Group’s external auditors.  Details of the aggregate amount of external auditors’ fees paid for FY2018 and the breakdown for the audit and non-audit services are set out in Note 23.3 to the', 'The internal auditor adopts a risk-based auditing approach in developing the annual internal audit plan, which focuses on material internal controls across the Group’s business, including financial, operational, compliance and information technology controls. The internal audit plan is submitted to the AC for its review and approval at the start of each financial year. Periodic internal audit reports are submitted to the AC detailing the internal auditor’s progress in executing the internal audit plan and any major findings and corrective actions taken by Management.', '3  Excluding the Ensign group of companies comprising Ensign InfoSecurity Pte. Ltd., its subsidiaries and associated companies. Ensign InfoSecurity Pte. Ltd. became a subsidiary of StarHub with effect from 4 October 2018 and will be retaining Deloitte & Touche LLP as the external auditors of the Ensign group of companies pursuant to Rule 716 of the SGX-ST Listing Manual.', 'StarHub provides regular and timely information to the investment community regarding the Group’s performance, progress and prospects as well as major industry and corporate developments and other relevant information. StarHub solicits and considers the views of shareholders via (a) periodic analyst and media briefings throughout the year, (b) regular meetings between the CEO, the StarHub IR team and institutional investors through international road shows and conferences organised by major brokerage firms and (c) third-party perception studies on StarHub.', 'Apart from SGXNET announcements and the Annual Report, the StarHub IR website at www.starhub.com/ir, which is regularly updated, is the main source of information for shareholders. It houses all media releases, financial results, annual reports, SGXNET announcements, presentation materials, archived webcasts and conference calls, as well as other corporate information relating to the Group. Investors may also elect to be notified of any new updates via an email alert service. However, new material price-sensitive information such as financial results are released via SGXNET before being posted on the StarHub IR website or the conduct of any media or analyst conferences. This ensures fair and non-selective disclosure of information to all shareholders.', 'StarHub also recognises the important contribution and support of our other stakeholders, including customers, employees, suppliers and communities whom we do business with and work, in our efforts in addressing and achieving sustainability. We promote and manage our stakeholder relations through regular and proactive engagement with our stakeholders, at the corporate level and functional divisions and volunteer committees across the Group.  Further details on StarHub’s communication with our shareholders and other stakeholders can be found in the', 'Notices of general meetings, together with the annual reports or circulars, are generally issued to all shareholders (including foreign shareholders) at least 21 days prior to the scheduled meetings. This provides ample time for shareholders to review the documents ahead of the meetings and appoint their proxies to attend the meetings if they wish. As part of StarHub’s commitment towards more environmentally-friendly and sustainable practices, StarHub makes our annual reports and circulars available online at the StarHub IR website. Printed copies of', 'For greater transparency and efficiency in the voting process and results, electronic poll voting is conducted. The results showing the number of votes cast for and against each resolution and the respective percentages are announced via SGXNET on the same day of the general meeting. Minutes of general meetings are made available on the StarHub', 'StarHub and its minority shareholders. Under the review procedures, the IPT terms and pricing are to be (a) consistent with StarHub’s usual business practices and policies and no more favourable to the interested persons than those extended to unrelated third parties and (b) fair and reasonable. StarHub will also consider factors such as specification compliance, track record, experience and expertise, as well as preferential rates or discounts for bulk purchases. An authorised senior officer who does not have any conflict of interests in relation to the IPT will determine whether the IPT terms and pricing are fair and reasonable. Where possible, competitive quotations or tenders for', 'CORPORATE GOVERNANCE(Cont’d)purchase transactions are procured. StarHub has also put in place procedures to identify the interested persons and record the IPTs entered into by the Group. All IPTs are subject to review and approval by the appropriate approving authority, including the AC, based on pre-determined threshold limits under the IPT Mandate. The IPTs are reviewed by the internal auditors on a quarterly basis and a quarterly report on all such transactions are provided to the AC. IPT disclosures are made via SGXNET announcements on a quarterly and annual basis at the same time as the Group’s quarterly and full-year results announcements.', 'Group employees. The policy imposes trading blackout periods which exceed the requirements of the SGX-ST Listing Manual, pursuant to which:• All Directors and Group employees are prohibited from dealing in StarHub securities during the period:(a) commencing two weeks prior to the announcement of the Group’s results for each of the first three quarters of our financial year and ending on the date of announcement of the relevant results; and (b) commencing one month prior to the announcement of the Group’s full year results and ending on the date of announcement of the relevant results.• All Management and employees directly involved in the preparation of the Group’s quarterly and full year results are prohibited from dealing in', 'All Directors, Management and Group employees are notified by email prior to the commencement of each trading blackout period and upon the lifting of the restrictions after the announcement of the respective financial results. The policy discourages trading on short-term considerations and reminds Directors, Management and Group employees of their obligations under insider trading laws.', 'For the issue of new StarHub securities, while the SGX-ST Listing Manual permits the Board to seek a general mandate from shareholders to allot and issue up to 20% of StarHub’s total issued share capital other than on a pro rata basis to existing shareholders, the Board has decided to limit such mandate to 15% only. In addition, for the specific mandate from shareholders to allot and issue StarHub shares under the RSP and the PSP, the Board has limited the aggregate number of StarHub shares available for grant under the RSP and the PSP to 8% of StarHub’s total issued share capital (instead of the permitted 15% under the SGX-ST Listing Manual), taking into account any outstanding unvested share awards.', 'Group) to report in a responsible manner, any concern or complaint in relation to any irregularity, inappropriate behavior, legal or ethical violation or other serious breaches of internal processes. Such reporting channels include a dedicated whistle blowing email and a direct channel to the AC Chairman and the General Counsel (via email and/or mail).', 'StarHub has put in place the following policies and procedures to guide employees in carrying out their duties and responsibilities with high standards of personal and corporate integrity when dealing with StarHub, our competitors, customers, suppliers and the community: • StarHub’s Employee Code of Conduct and Ethics; • Corporate Gift and Hospitality Policy; • Supplier Code of Conduct; • Purchasing Procedure; and• Request for Proposal/Tender Procedure.', 'These policies and procedures cover (a) business conduct (including employees’ compliance with anti-corruption and anti-bribery laws), (b) conduct in the workplace, (c) protection of StarHub’s assets, proprietary and confidential information as well as intellectual property, (d) conflicts of interest, (e) non-solicitation of customers and employees and (f) workplace health and safety. In parallel, the Purchasing', 'Compliance Leave Policy as an additional risk mitigation measure to enhance corporate governance. The policy is applicable to employees who hold Senior Manager positions and above, finance advocates and employees with sensitive job functions such as handling monies, inventories, payroll processing and approvals, risk management as well as purchasing of goods and services.', 'StarHub continually evaluates new technologies which may further enhance the security of our confidential and sensitive information. We are in the process of implementing a Laptop Encryption Solution which ensures that sensitive and confidential information relating to StarHub will continue to be protected if any laptop belonging to employees is lost or stolen. This measure enhances the security of confidential and commercially sensitive documents stored in such laptops.', 'The Board recognises the importance and value of diversity. It constantly seeks to maintain an optimal mix of expertise, experience (both local and international), knowledge, gender, culture and nationality. A well-balanced Board with appropriate diversity will contribute positively in overseeing the delivery of the Group’s strategy, bringing fresh perspectives and providing constructive challenges to Management.', 'The Board consists of Directors who possess a broad range of core competencies and experience in enterprise and banking, accounting and finance, investment, risk management, legal, regulatory, technology, business and industry knowledge, management and strategic planning experience, as well as customer-based experience and knowledge. Gender diversity is also considered in relation to the Board composition. Following the appointments of Ms Nayantara Bali and Ms Ng Shin Ein in FY2018, the', 'In proposing candidates for appointment or re-election as Directors, the NGC considers several factors, including (i) the composition, the diversity and the need for progressive renewal of the Board, (ii) each candidate’s competencies, commitment, contribution and performance (including attendance, preparedness, participation and candour) and (iii) potential conflicts of interest. This ensures that the Board composition reflects an appropriate mix having regard to skills, experience, expertise, diversity and independence, which enables the Board to stay engaged and agile in meeting the needs of the Group.', 'Guideline 1.6 (Cont’d) (b) What are the types of information and training provided to (i) new directors and (ii) existing directors to keep them up-to-date?(i)  All newly-appointed Directors participate in a comprehensive orientation that is bespoke for the Group’s business and operations, including the opportunity to meet with the CEO and Senior', 'Board size, the degree of Board independence and the mix and diversity of skills, knowledge and experience of the Board, (ii) information management and Board processes, including level and timeliness of information provided to the Board, (iii) integrity and corporate social responsibility of StarHub, (iv) managing StarHub’s performance, (v) effectiveness of Board Committees, (vi) CEO performance and succession planning, (vii)', 'Mr Kaviratne and Mr Teo have each demonstrated the essential independence of mind and objectivity of judgement to act honestly and in the best interests of the Group in the discharge of their Directors’ duties, and therefore the NGC and the Board considers them to be independent. When assessing objectivity and independent judgement, the NGC and the Board would consider, inter alia, the approach, character and attitude of each Director and the value each Director brings, including whether such Director (i) is free from any interest and any business or other relationship which could, or could reasonably be perceived to, interfere with the exercise of the Director’s independent business judgement with a view to the best interests of the Group and (ii) has any material contractual relationship with the Group other than as a Director. Mr Kaviratne and Mr', 'Guideline 9.3 (a) Has the Company disclosed each key management personnel’s remuneration, in bands of S$250,000 or in more detail, as well as a breakdown (in percentage or dollar terms) into base/fixed salary, variable or performance-related income/bonuses, benefits in kind, stock options granted, share-based incentives and awards, and other long-term incentives? If not, what are the reasons for not disclosing so?', 'The ERCC seeks to ensure that the level and mix of remuneration for the CEO and key management personnel are competitive and relevant, aligned with shareholders’ interests and promote the long-term success of the Group. Remuneration for the CEO and key management personnel comprises a fixed component, a variable cash component, a share-based component and market-related benefits. The ERCC ensures that the remuneration paid to them is closely linked to the achievement of business and individual performance targets. The performance targets are determined by the ERCC based on realistic yet stretch levels each year to motivate them to achieve a high degree of business performance with emphasis on both short and long-term quantifiable objectives.(b) What were the performance conditions used to determine their entitlement under the short-term and long-term incentive schemes?', 'Throughout the financial year, the Board receives monthly management and financial reports which provide updates on key performance indicators and a financial analysis of the Group, as well as regular analysts’ reports and media articles on StarHub and the industry. Management also gives network and technology briefings to the Board from time to time.', 'Board Committee meeting, Management provides the Directors with timely information that is relevant to matters on the agenda, save for sensitive matters to be tabled at the meeting itself. This is to give Directors sufficient time to review and consider the matters being tabled and/or discussed. The Board also receives updates from the Board Committee Chairmen at Board meetings, on key matters raised and/or decisions made at the last-held meeting of each Board Committee. For matters which require the Board’s approval, the Board', 'Based on the risk management system and internal controls established and maintained by the Group, the reviews performed by Management as supported by audit findings of the external and internal auditors and the relevant written assurance from the CEO and the CFO, the Board (with the concurrence of the RC and the AC) is of the opinion that the risk management system and internal controls of the Group are adequate and effective to address the financial, operational, compliance and information technology risks as well as the risk management objectives which the Group considers relevant and material to its current business environment and scope of operations. The Group also has an event and crisis management process in place which is regularly reviewed by the MRC.', 'In assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of the internal controls, the Board ensures that material assets are properly safeguarded, integrity and availability of critical information and systems (including accounting records) are maintained, and reliable financial information is prepared in compliance with applicable internal policies, laws and regulations.(b) In respect of the past 12 months, has the Board received assurance from the CEO and the CFO as well as the internal auditor that: (i) the financial records have been properly maintained and the financial statements give true and fair view of the', 'Yes. For FY2018, the Board has received written assurance from the CEO and the CFO that: (i) the financial records of the Group have been properly maintained and the financial statements give a true and fair view of the Group’s operations and finances and (ii) the risk management system and internal controls of the Group are adequate and effective to address the financial, operational, compliance and information technology risks which the Group considers relevant and material to its current business environment and scope of operations. In addition, Management adopts an enhanced process to sign off assurance to the CEO and the CFO, in order to enhance the current processes for supporting the Board’s opinion on the adequacy and effectiveness of the risk management system and internal controls of the Group.', 'The AC has performed a review of the independence and objectivity of the external auditors, as well as the volume and type of non-audit services provided by the external auditors during FY2018. Based on such review, the AC is satisfied that the independence of the external auditors has not been compromised by the provision of the non-audit services and that Rules 712 and 715 of the SGX-ST', 'StarHub, through its Investor Relations (IR) team, communicates regularly with shareholders and the investment community through timely, accurate, fair and transparent communication, including regular dialogues and timely disclosures of material and other pertinent information via SGXNET announcements.(b) Is this done by a dedicated investor relations team (or equivalent)? If not, who performs this role?', 'Apart from SGXNET announcements and the annual report, the StarHub IR website at www.starhub.com/ir, which is regularly updated, is the main source of information for shareholders. It houses all media releases, financial results, annual reports, SGXNET announcements, presentation materials, archived webcasts and conference calls, as well as other corporate information relating to the Group. Investors may also elect to be notified of any new updates via an email alert service.', 'New York Festivals 2018• Gold: Art Direction: Promotion/Open & IDs  [Hub Sports Image Versus Starts Here]• Gold: Special Visual Effects: Promotion/Open & IDs  [Hub Sports Image Versus Starts Here]• Silver: Station/Image Promotion  [Hub Sports Image Versus Starts Here]• Silver: Sound Design: Promotion/Open & IDs  [WTA Japan Open 2017]• Silver: Sports Program Promotion [WTA Finals Singapore 2017]• Silver: Interactive Promotion [NSG 2017]• Bronze:  Art Direction: Promotion/Open & IDs  [WTA Japan Open 2017]', 'Top of Mind Concerns Foremost on the minds of our investors is the impact of Singapore’s competitive landscape and evolving technology on StarHub. Without a doubt, change is a certainty, and StarHub has dared to embark on a bold and comprehensive multi-year transformation journey commencing in 2018, to upgrade into a leaner and more agile organisation. This journey sweeps through simplification of our key product lines – mobile and pay TV, as well as a refresh of our support backbone and processes in Information', 'Our Board continues to prudently consider a multi-year view of our earnings, free cash flow, growth prospects, investment needs and an optimal balance sheet, when deciding on our dividend policy. For FY2019, we have committed to pay 9 cents dividend per share, or at least 80% of our net profit attributable to shareholders.', 'Management (ERM) program is centred on being inclusive, multi-disciplinary and focuses on risks and opportunities that are pertinent to our business activities that are aligned to our company’s strategic objectives. The Group seeks to embed risk management in its decision-making processes and key business activities at all levels and adopts a comprehensive and practical approach to mitigating our risks.', 'Through our Enterprise Risk Management framework, we seek to:• Achieve an accurate, comprehensive understanding of StarHub’s key risks and opportunities through a top-down and bottom-up approach to identifying and mitigating our risks;• Identify and prioritise key risks and opportunities which are aligned to our business activities and strategic objectives;• Promote a culture of risk management which entails awareness, accountability and ownership of risk and risk mitigation;• Maintain consistent oversight of StarHub’s Top Risks at the Board and Management Levels.', 'StarHub’s focus is to be a leader in providing a superior customer experience across all service lines.• To help gauge StarHub’s performance across customer touch points, StarHub adopts the Net Promoter Score (NPS) metric to measure satisfaction across a customer’s journey.• StarHub clocked Singapore’s fastest 4G and 3G speeds according to OpenSignal Speed Awards 2018, ensuring our commitment to customers’ needs and exceeding their expectations.• StarHub utilises data analytics to gain insights and to better understand customer profiles, needs and behaviours. Through these insights, StarHub conducts targeted marketing and promotional activities to reward loyal customers and ensures that its offerings exceed customer needs and expectations.', 'StarHub’s 4G core network) to deliver the speeds, capacity and latency required to support enhanced mobile broadband services.• StarHub continues to enhance and refine its enterprise propositions by offering digital solutions such as Analytics-as-a-Service, cloud platforms, cyber security solutions and next-generation connectivity solutions such as connected buildings, connected cars and connected living.', 'The increased pace of technological disruption, digitisation of business processes and the ventures into new business environments have resulted in the need to attract and retain human talent with the skill sets and capabilities required to drive the business forward.• StarHub benchmarks its Human Resource practices by taking part in multi-industry studies such as the Aon Hewitt Best Employee', 'Survey to identify key areas for improvement. Additionally, StarHub has its own internal employee experience surveys with follow-up focus group discussions to better understand and address employee concerns.• StarHub continues to place strong emphasis on attracting, hiring and retaining talent with competitive remuneration packages, recognition and award and talent development programs.• StarHub has a defined learning and development roadmap for its employees. Employees are encouraged to take charge of their own development by enrolling in personal development courses conducted by internal and external training providers, aligned with their own development roadmap.• StarHub has a robust succession plan in place to ensure leadership continuity and the transfer of necessary knowledge and information.', 'Information Infrastructure could potentially cause:\uf1c8 Disruptions to StarHub’s network;\uf1c8 Interruptions to services provided to customers;\uf1c8 Leakage of sensitive and/or confidential information;\uf1c8 Significant regulatory fines and penalties.• StarHub has implemented security policies, procedures and systems based on international standards such as the ISO 27001, and has measures in place to comply with regulations such as the CyberSecurity Act 2018. We will continue to benchmark ourselves against relevant frameworks to minimise the risk of security incidents. • StarHub regularly conducts rigorous penetration testing and vulnerability assessments on its networks and systems to ensure that vulnerabilities detected and resolved in a timely and effective manner.• StarHub has defined business continuity management procedures and disaster recovery plans and conducts regular crisis exercises to ensure operational readiness in the event of a disruption.', 'StarHub’s business is subjected to the fast-moving regulatory landscape that reflects the dynamic nature of the telecommunications industry. Apart from complying with prevailing legislations and regulatory requirements, radical regulatory and legislative changes may result in a significant impact to StarHub’s business.• StarHub’s regulatory team reviews regulatory requirements on a consistent basis and proactively engages IMDA where necessary.• StarHub’s regulatory team has regular engagements with internal business units to provide advice on IMDA requirements and to monitor compliance with existing obligations.', 'Mobile service revenue was lower by S$73.1 million or 8.1% YoY due to lower IDD, voice and data usage revenue, lower subscription revenue due to higher phone subsidies given to customers, and a higher mix of SIM-Only plans. This was partially mitigated by higher revenue from roaming and mobile value-added services (VAS). 4Q2018 also included higher provisions for customer loyalty programmes as the redemption rates are expected to increase and a catch-up adjustment for contract asset provision as a result of the higher subsidies given. Excluding the one-time provisions and catch-up adjustment, Mobile service revenue would have decreased by S$55.1 million or 6.2% in 2018.', 'As of 31 December 2018, the Group’s total non-current assets of S$1,704.7 million was S$102.9 million higher when compared to S$1,601.8 million as of 31 December 2017. The increase was primarily due to higher property, plant and equipment and intangible assets. This was partially offset by the decrease in contract assets and the Group’s investment in mm2.', 'Total current liabilities decreased by S$142.1 million to S$871.8 million as of 31 December 2018. This is due to a decrease in trade and other payables. In addition, some bank borrowings were refinanced resulting in the reclassification of the current portion of the bank borrowings from current liabilities to non-current liabilities.', 'On account of a lower cash and cash equivalent balance, net debt was S$230.2 million higher at S$862.5 million as of 31 December 2018 compared to S$632.3 million as of 31 December 2017. As a ratio of the past 12 months’ EBITDA, the Group’s net debt was higher at 1.52 times as of 31 December 2018, up from 0.98 times as of 31 December 2017.', 'With the roll-out of our strategic transformation plan in 2018, which includes our operational efficiency programme and the associated internal re-organisation, our approach to sustainability and ESG performance has also evolved to align with our key business objectives and our material sustainability risks and opportunities. Our 13 sustainability material topics in 2018 have remained unchanged from last year. These have been identified following a comprehensive materiality assessment, including extensive engagement with our internal stakeholders and senior management.', 'C. Investing in Our Community  The rapid growth of digital technologies in the workplace has enhanced productivity for many companies. However, the increased use of technology has led to a sharp reduction in the number of traditional semi-skilled and back-office jobs. As a result, unemployment can generate a range of serious social and economic challenges for communities.', 'E. Being a Responsible Business Acting responsibly is integral to business performance. Strong governance is paramount. As our business relies on a large supply chain spanning over 1,000 companies, we look beyond our own operations and seek to ensure the safety, well-being and ethical treatment of all who work with', 'Sustainability Targets: 2019 Moving into 2019, our Board has identified the following five sustainability targets that we will commit to:• Increasing our renewable energy capacity to 10% by 2022• Increasing the volume of e-waste collected by StarHub annually to 125 tonnes by 2022• Establishing a Climate Risk Framework• Establishing a formal governance structure to implement our new Supplier Code of Conduct• Enhancing our corporate social responsibility through employee engagement. Driving participation to do good together as a Group', 'Continuing from last year’s focus on aligning our sustainability approach with our business objectives, we have established the sustainability direction and targets for the upcoming year. This is geared towards aligning action plans with our overall business strategy and priorities, driven and owned across functions. StarHub is committed to communicating clear targets in the coming sustainability reports, along with each objective and the progress made in meeting these targets.', 'We aim to contribute to addressing these global issues on a local scale in Singapore. For StarHub, operating responsibly is an important first step in supporting the global UN SDGs. Beyond that, we have identified eight SDGs where we believe we have an opportunity to make the biggest impact through our business practices, products and services, programmes, as well as partnerships, by addressing growing inequality, high youth unemployment, market disruption caused by technology and artificial intelligence, and pressure on our natural resources.', 'The amount of e-waste generated globally is rapidly growing as consumers dispose of older gadgets for newer and more sophisticated mobile phones, laptops and/or electronic devices. In the course of providing ICT solutions, our products and customers form part of this cycle. We are therefore committed to responsible consumption and production.', 'At StarHub, we are conscious of the need to understand and minimise our environmental impact as we continue to enhance our competitiveness and expand our business and network infrastructure. We focus on monitoring and managing our energy consumption, greenhouse gas emissions and e-waste. We also strive to motivate employees, customers and communities to respect the environment and encourage them to apply the same values in their personal lives. Our Corporate Sustainability Advocate works with cross-functional representatives to implement various environmental initiatives.', 'Singapore and the implementation of the national e-waste management system by 2021.“The support of individuals, communities and the private sector is crucial in building a robust recycling culture in Singapore. I am heartened by DHL, StarHub and TES’s leadership, in the creation of Singapore’s largest voluntary e-waste collection and recycling programme, and commend Best', 'They are also our main energy consumption sources. As such, we focus on operating our technical centres in an energy-efficient manner and adopting energy-efficient technologies. Despite a decrease in our petrol consumption, our total energy consumption has increased this year. The increase is due to the expansion of our measurement of energy consumption to include two additional technical centres. We will continue to evaluate opportunities to reduce our emissions, including a focus on increasing our renewable energy capacity.', 'Besides energy consumption, our resource usage also includes water consumption. As a service provider, our water consumption is mostly contained within our offices, shops and data centres. We draw all our water from municipal sources. Even though the impact of our operations on water conservation is limited, we regard it as integral to our', '2. National Parks (NParks) – As part of the Schools E-Waste Challenge, we invited the top five schools with the highest e-waste collection to a tree planting event to raise further awareness about e-waste and climate change. We donated $10,000 and planted 50 trees in East Coast Park which we hope the community will enjoy for generations to come.', 'Our strategic transformation plan was announced in October 2018. Recognising the pressures from intense local competition and disruptive industry trends, we initiated an operational efficiency programme to improve productivity, improve speed in decision-making and lower operating expenditures across the board. The strategic review process resulted in a reduction of workforce.', 'Singapore, we provided comprehensive career transition assistance and outplacement counselling, including career coaching and skills upgrading programmes, to our impacted employees. Impacted employees are paired with employability coaches to discuss their career needs and are invited to attend an employability workshop to build and develop job search skills. The coaches also assisted with job matching such as job referrals as well as encouraging attendance at events such as career fairs to meet prospective employers. “We wish to recognise the extensive contribution that our impacted employees have made to the company’s past development and growth. Such decisions are never taken lightly. I am very aware of the impact on all our employees, and we are making every effort to support those impacted through this challenging transition. The redundancies are not an individual performance issue but one of strategic realignment of StarHub. We have been extremely fortunate to have many competent people in our team, but some positions are not sustainable given the current industry pressures.”', 'The strategic transformation plan is aimed at simplifying our corporate structure, product offerings and customer touchpoints with an ultimate aim to be more agile, to deliver better customer experience and to drive sustainable growth. While reducing overall resources, StarHub will continue to grow its workforce in specific areas such as cyber security, home and enterprise solutions and customer care. We remain committed to supporting our employees and providing a safe, respectful and collaborative workplace.', 'Women still face challenges in the workplace, so it is important that we recognise and support their aspirations both at work and at home. Only then can we retain and develop the best talent for the company’s growth. This recognition will spur us to continue advocating that gender equality is not only beneficial for women, it is also ultimately advantageous for businesses.”', 'Company-Led Training (CLT) funding to invest in our employees’ upskilling to ensure they have the relevant learning and development opportunities to build functional and technical skills to succeed in their jobs. In addition, we continue to invest in our leaders by continually building management and leadership skills, through our People Leadership programmes, to enable them to engage and motivate teams to perform effectively.', 'StarHub employees are also entitled to maternity leave, paternity leave and shared parental leave. Parental leave is available for all employees. Eligible working fathers are entitled to two weeks of paid paternity leave and up to four weeks of shared parental leave. In 2018, 145 of our employees applied for the parental leave with a 99% return rate. We also had a retention rate of', 'Understanding with SISEU which allows rank and file employees to participate in recreational and social activities organised by SISEU. We maintain a collaborative partnership and have open and timely dialogues with SISEU and will continue to work closely with SISEU to ensure our employees’ skills stay relevant as we undergo our business transformation.', 'All employees are entitled to two days of volunteering leave. In 2018, our employees contributed 328 hours in volunteer service with 3.3% of our workforce using their volunteering leave allowance. • StarHub volunteers took part in an eco-workshop on greening lifestyles and office areas in conjunction with Earth Hour 2018.• StarHub volunteers planted 50 trees along East', 'Coast Park, together with winners of the top schools for the Schools E-Waste Challenge.• Partnering with LIEN Aid to host an exhibition open to all tenants and visitors at the StarHub Green lobby on water issues and conservation. • StarHub volunteers joined A Walk in the Park session, accompanying youths from Care Corner Crossroad', 'Our People Strategy 5: Employee Health, Safety and Wellness (Material Topic)The health and safety of our employees is important and is one of the factors that contributes towards their performance in the Group. We have a responsibility to create a workplace environment that promotes the health and ensures the safety of our employees. Exclusive benefits for', 'Health Review Committee (WSHRC) is represented by both management and employees and consists of a representative and an alternate from each work area within StarHub. The WSHRC works closely with employees, business units and external parties with the relevant expertise and knowledge for the effective implementation of workplace health and safety. The WHSRC periodically reviews policies, procedures and practices relating to occupational health and safety and monitors the effectiveness of our approach.', 'While our community relies on StarHub services to support their daily personal and business needs, we understand that digital disruption can also have a negative impact. New technology requires new skills which can be hard for disadvantaged groups to develop, such as those with learning or physical disabilities or at-risk youths. Such skills are now essential for everyday life, especially in terms of employability. StarHub is therefore committed to taking steps to overcome this digital divide and share the benefits of technology with everyone.', 'Through Community Chest, we donated these funds to three voluntary welfare organisations that provide services to people with intellectual or developmental disabilities and mental health issues to help them live independently. Beneficiaries obtain life and vocational skills that prepare them for employment opportunities and assist them with integrating into the community. • Metta School – 398 students with intellectual disabilities were equipped for a more promising future through a specialised employability and life skills programme to help them integrate better into society. • MINDS Towner Garden School – 197 students with autism and moderate intellectual or developmental disability between the ages of 6 and 18 are currently enrolled in this programme teaching critical employment skills.• Singapore Anglican Community', 'Services (SACS) – 50 employers and co-workers were trained to enhance their knowledge and skills for working with people suffering from mental health issues (PMHIs) as part of Project H.I.R.E. Vocational and social skills training was also provided for PMHIs, following which five were assessed to be ready for employment and all five are currently employed.', 'Ricarda and Richley are siblings. While Richley would come to class in high spirits, Ricarda tended to be more serious. Teachers soon discovered that Ricarda was often sternly scolded by her mother, causing her to be reserved in class. With the help of her Lead Teacher and volunteers from the programme funded by StarHub, Ricarda is gaining confidence and is even participating more actively in lessons and helping her younger brother in class.', '100 elderly and youths. StarHub contributed over $25,000 to provide SIM cards, service bundles (talk time, data and SMS) and tracking devices to allow caregivers and parents to monitor the location of their loved ones, to have peace of mind. This empowered both the elderly and youths to travel more independently.', 'Community Development Council (CDC) since 2011. With a contribution of $120,000 in 2018, the programme supported 380 underprivileged children in their academic studies and life skills through two core modules – communication and problem-solving. The programme also served as a platform to help build their character and encourage values that would inspire them to give back to the community.', 'Assistance Fund with $10,000. This unique concert serves as a platform to promote a more inclusive society in Singapore by showcasing differently-abled students on the concert stage and provided opportunities for creative and talented individuals to contribute to the community in different ways. StarHub was honoured to be recognised as a Silver Sponsor.', 'A customer’s experience starts from their very first contact with StarHub, whether through various media channels or via interactions with our service staff. It is these interactions that are essential in creating a safe, secure and reliable environment for our customers to connect with and access pre and aftersales service support. We are committed to being fair, transparent and responsible in dealing with customers and strive to listen to their needs and recommend best fit solutions to create a positive experience for them.', 'SUSTAINABILITY REPORTTowards a Sustainable Future (Cont’d)experience across all touch-points, sales and service transactions. We take customer feedback seriously as it is a key mechanism for us to listen to and understand consumer preferences and enhance our product and service offerings. We collect feedback from customers through surveys and across various touchpoints. We use the Net Promoter System (NPS) index to gauge customers’ overall satisfaction with our products and services, as well as customers’ loyalty and follow up with those who have submitted unfavourable ratings for our products or services to address their concerns.', 'Customer Experience Strategy 2: Clarity of Pricing and Billing and Product Simplification (Material Topic)We strive to make our bills clear and easy to read so that we can build a relationship of trust with our customers. When new products and services are launched, our customer service staff are trained to clearly communicate to our customers our pricing structure and contract terms. Customers may also access our Finance & Billing page on our website for details on understanding, managing and paying their bills. Illustrations and explanations are also provided on the website for the various scenarios, products and services.', 'With a focus on simplicity for the customer, we launched our new unique SIM Only mobile plans in 2018 which marked the start of our “Hello Change” journey to do different and better by providing truly contract-free options to give customers extra-large data bundles that are easy to buy, use and modify. Customers now have just three', 'The plans are devoid of hidden charges for customers to enjoy peace-of-mind. In a market-first, StarHub scrapped all one-time administrative, activation and SIM card fees, as well as monthly subscription fees for caller number display and auto-roam, which add up to about $200 over 12 months for a typical customer. In 2019, we will continue to focus on product simplification and maintain clarity in pricing and billing for our customers.', 'In 2018, there were no complaints received concerning breaches of customer privacy and zero identified leaks. We have also received inputs from internal and external security sources which we have reviewed and taken the necessary actions to enhance our control measures. We aim to maintain zero leaks and breaches of customer privacy in 2019, but we also recognise that the cyber security environment is ever evolving and additional threats appear almost daily.', 'Transparency Index (SGTI) is the leading index for assessing corporate governance practices of Singapore listed companies. As testament to our commitment to responsible corporate governance, our SGTI score has been increasing every year, achieving 100 out of a maximum of 143 points in 2018, with our ranking also moving up one place since 2017 to the joint 17th position in', 'Apart from our customers and employees, our industry peers are also a driving force for us to pursue the new development of products and service excellence to improve our performance. As such, we respect and comply with relevant legislation, licence obligations and codes of practice relating to anti-competitive behaviour for our business.', 'In 2018, we began the second phase of our approach to supplier management to ensure that companies supplying StarHub with products or services are aligned with our values and are compliant with the applicable regulations. Upon the completion of this second phase, we aim to establish a robust governance structure for the new Supplier', 'StarHub made this public commitment to our employees, suppliers, customers and other stakeholders by sharing our Supplier Code of Conduct (Supplier Code) in 2018 after a risk assessment that started in 2017. Moving forward, we plan to develop materials to grow the awareness of our employees and suppliers in the Supplier Code.', 'Our supplier risk assessment started in 2017. In 2018, we identified the level of risk that certain suppliers may pose to our business. This assessment is key to our resilient and responsible sourcing strategy. We value our relationships with our suppliers and aspire to work together to go beyond commercial interests, to minimise social and environmental risks.', 'As an ICT Group, we are cognisant of our ability to contribute to promoting social cohesion through our products and services. We see cause-related marketing as part of our direction towards responsible marketing. On an annual basis, we celebrate our nation’s independence with the launch of a campaign that highlights different segments of our society and champions various social causes. #TogetherWeCan was the theme for 2018, honouring the can-do and never-give-up Singapore spirit by shining the spotlight on the stories of five inspiring Singaporeans.', '1 Figures include voluntary and involuntary turnover. These refer to employees who are effectively no longer part of the Group’s headcount within the period from 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2018.2  Figures for all purchase orders raised during 2018, except for those related to content acquisition. Most of our procurement is done through purchase orders.', 'As in our previous reports, we have followed the GRI principles for defining the sustainability report content and quality. We have determined the report content using the principles of stakeholder inclusiveness, sustainability context, materiality and completeness. To ensure quality of the report, we have applied the GRI principles of accuracy, balance, clarity, comparability, reliability and timeliness.', 'StarHub has sought an independent limited assurance for this sustainability report to provide greater confidence to our readers on the accuracy of the information reported. Please refer to pages 135-138 for the assurance statement and scope of data assured. The findings of the assurance procedures are shared with StarHub’s Board.', 'Our Materiality ProcessWe focus on the topics that matter most to our business and our stakeholders. Our material topics in 2018 have remained unchanged from last year, where we undertook a comprehensive materiality assessment following best practices outlined by the globally recognised international reporting standards by GRI. This assessment included extensive engagement with our internal stakeholders and senior management, resulting in the 13 topics we believe remain most material at this time.', '918 females in 2018.• 93 males and 52 females took parental leave in 2018.• 92 males (99%) and 52 females (100%) returned to work after taking parental leave in 2018.• In 2018, 49 males (59%) and 31 females (53%) were still employed 12 months after returning to work from parental leave taken in 2017.', '100,000 employed females).• 0 major injuries reported at a major injury rate of 0 per 100,000 employed persons.• Accident frequency rate of 0.2 per million working hours.• Lost Day Rate of 0.10 per million  working hours.• Absentee Rate of 3049 per million working hours.• Occupational disease rate of 0 per 100,000 employed persons.', 'Rule 711B of the SGX Listing Manual, and the information and assertions contained within it; – determining StarHub’s objectives in respect of sustainable development performance and reporting, including the identification of stakeholders and material issues; – establishing and maintaining appropriate internal control systems that enable the preparation and presentation of the', 'SSAE 3000 and to express a conclusion based on the work performed.  SSAE 3000 requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain limited assurance about whether the Report is free from material misstatement.  The extent of our work performed depends on our professional judgement and our assessment of the engagement risk.', 'A limited assurance engagement consists of making inquiries, primarily of persons responsible for the preparation of information presented in the Report, and applying analytical and other evidence gathering procedures, as appropriate.  These procedures included:– Inquiries of management to gain an understanding of StarHub’s processes for determining the material issues for', 'SUSTAINABILITY REPORTIndependent Limited Assurance Report (Cont’d)– Interviews with relevant staff at the corporate and business unit level responsible for providing the information in the Report.– Visits to offices and data centres operating in Singapore selected on the basis of a risk analysis including the consideration of both quantitative and qualitative criteria.– Enquires about the design and implementation of the systems and methods used to collect and report on the GRI Disclosures, including the aggregation of the reported information.– Comparing the GRI Disclosures presented in the Report to corresponding information in the relevant underlying sources to determine whether all the relevant information contained in such underlying sources has been appropriately included in the', 'In our opinion:(a) the financial statements set out on pages 157 to 260 are drawn up so as to give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group and of the Company as at 31 December 2018 and the financial performance and the cash flows of the Group, and changes in equity of the Group and of the Company for the year ended on that date in accordance with the provisions of the Singapore Companies Act,', 'Directors The directors in office at the date of this statement are as follows: Steven Terrell Clontz (Chairman)Ma Kah WohNihal Vijaya Devadas Kaviratne CBE Teo Ek Tor Stephen Geoffrey MillerMichelle Lee GuthrieNayantara Bali (Appointed on 6 August 2018)Ng Shin Ein (Appointed on 17 September 2018)Lionel Yeo Hung Tong (Appointed on 10 January 2019)Lim Ming SeongNasser MarafihNaoki Wakai', 'According to the register kept by the Company for the purposes of Section 164 of the Companies Act, Chapter 50, particulars of interests of directors who held office at the end of the financial year (including those held by their spouses and infant children) in shares, debentures, warrants, share options and share awards in the Company and in related corporations (other than wholly-owned subsidiaries) are as follows:', 'Except as disclosed in this statement, no director who held office at the end of the financial year had interests in shares, debentures, warrants, share options or share awards of the Company, or of its related corporations, either at the beginning of the financial year, or at date of appointment if later, or at the end of the financial year.', 'Except as disclosed under the “Share-based Payments” section of this statement, neither at the end of nor at any time during the financial year, was the Company a party to any arrangement whose objects are, or one of whose objects is, to enable the directors of the Company to acquire benefits by means of the acquisition of shares in or debentures of the Company or any other body corporate.', 'The StarHub Share Plans 2014, the StarHub Share Plans 2004, the StarHub Share Option Plan 2004 and the StarHub Share Option Plan 2000 (collectively, “Plans”) are administered by the Company’s Executive Resource and Compensation Committee (“ERCC”) comprising five directors, namely Teo Ek Tor, Stephen Geoffrey Miller, Michelle Lee Guthrie, Lionel Yeo Hung Tong and Lim Ming Seong.', '31 December 2013, no shares will be delivered if the threshold performance targets are not achieved, while up to twice the number of shares that are the subject of the award will be delivered if the stretch performance targets are met or exceeded.  For share awards granted during and after the financial year ended 31 December 2014, no shares will be delivered if the threshold performance targets are not achieved, while up to 1.825 times the number of shares that are the subject of the award will be delivered if the stretch performance targets are met or exceeded. The performance targets benchmark (a) the performance of the Company’s Total Shareholders’ Return (“TSR”) measured against the MSCI Asia-Pacific Telecommunications Index (including Japan) over the performance period, and (b) the', '31 December 2016, no shares will be delivered if the threshold performance targets are not achieved, while up to 1.825 times the number of shares that are the subject of the award will be delivered if the stretch performance targets are met or exceeded. The performance targets benchmark (a) the performance of the Company’s TSR measured against the MSCI Asia-Pacific Telecommunications Index (including Japan) over the performance period, and (b) the Wealth Added which measures investment performance in terms of the', 'The performance targets benchmark (a) Returns on Invested Capital (“ROIC”), and (b) the Wealth Added which measures investment performance in terms of the Company’s TSR against shareholders’ expected returns using cost of equity as a benchmark. Details of share awards granted under the StarHub PSP 2004 and StarHub PSP 2014 (collectively, the “StarHub PSP Share Plans”) are  as follows:', 'Share-based Payments (continued)(v) Under the StarHub RSP 2004 and the StarHub RSP 2014, awards granted vest only after the satisfactory completion of time-based service conditions (time-based restricted awards) or where the award is performance-related, after a further period of service beyond the performance period (performance-based restricted awards).  No minimum vesting periods are prescribed under the StarHub RSP 2004 and the StarHub RSP 2014 and the length of the vesting period in respect of each award will be determined on a case-by-case basis.  Performance-based restricted awards differ from awards granted under the StarHub PSP 2004 and the StarHub PSP 2014 in that an extended vesting period is imposed beyond the performance period. The performance-based restricted awards represent the right of a participant to receive fully paid shares, their equivalent cash value or combinations thereof, free of charge, upon the participant achieving prescribed performance targets. The actual number of shares to be released depends on the level of attainment of the performance targets over the performance period. For performance-based restricted awards granted prior to and during the financial year ended 31 December 2007, (a) the first performance target benchmarks the performance of the Company’s TSR measured against the Straits Times Index (“STI”) over the performance period; and (b) the second performance target used is measured against Free Cash Flow (“FCF”). For performance-based restricted awards granted during and from financial year ended 31 December 2008 to financial year ended', 'Depreciation and Amortisation (“EBITDA”). For performance-based restricted awards granted during and from financial year ended 31 December 2016 onwards, the performance targets used are aligned to the overall strategic financial and operational goals of the Group.  Since the commencement of the StarHub RSP 2004 to the financial year ended 31 December 2018:(1) performance-based restricted awards aggregating 17,413,000 shares have been granted under the aforesaid Plan.  No shares will be delivered if the threshold performance targets are not achieved, while up to 1.3 times or as the case may be 1.5 times the number of shares that are the subject of the award, will be delivered if the stretch performance targets are met or exceeded;(2) a time-based restricted award of 100,000 shares has been granted on 15 January 2009.  The shares under this award were vested in three equal tranches over a 3-year period from 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2011 according to a specified vesting schedule; (3) a time-based restricted award of 213,000 shares has been granted on 17 May 2010. The shares under this award were vested in', 'May 2011 upon the participants’ continued tenure as non-executive directors of the Company for a full one-year period from the date of grant;(4) a restricted award of 155,900 shares has been granted on 7 June 2012.  The shares under this award formed 30% of the non-executive directors’ remuneration for the financial year ended 31 December 2011 and were vested immediately without any further vesting period;', 'Non-executive directors:Steven Terrell Clontz 35,900 103,500 35,900 –Ma Kah Woh 21,100 39,100 21,100 –Nihal Vijaya Devadas Kaviratne CBE 23,800 84,900 23,800 –Stephen Geoffrey Miller 22,700 22,700 22,700 –Teo Ek Tor 19,600 75,400 19,600 –Michelle Lee Guthrie 4,900 4,900 4,900 –Lim Ming Seong 22,300 79,500 22,300 –Nasser Marafih 17,000 51,900 17,000 –Rachel Eng Yaag Ngee* 19,800 39,600 19,800 –Liu Chee Ming* 17,300 60,600 17,300 –', 'Share Plans, which, in aggregate, represents 5% or more of the aggregate of:(a) the total number of new shares available under the StarHub Share Option Plans and the StarHub Share Plans collectively; and(b) the total number of existing shares delivered pursuant to options exercised under the StarHub Share Option Plans and awards released under the StarHub Share Plans collectively.', 'The Audit Committee has held four meetings since the last directors’ statement. In performing its functions in accordance with Section 201B of the Singapore Companies Act, Chapter 50, the Audit Committee met with the Company’s external and internal auditors to discuss the scope of their work, the results of their examination and evaluation of the Company’s internal accounting control system.', 'The Audit Committee has also reviewed the following:(1) assistance provided by the Company’s officers to the internal and external auditors;(2) financial statements of the Group and the Company prior to their submission to the directors of the Company for adoption; and(3) interested person transactions (as defined in Chapter 9 of the Listing Manual of the Singapore Exchange Securities Trading Limited) of the Company and its subsidiaries and the Company’s compliance with the review procedures of such transactions.', 'The Audit Committee has full access to management and is given the resources required for it to discharge its functions.  It has full authority and the discretion to invite any director or executive officer to attend its meetings. The Audit Committee also recommends the appointment of the external auditors and reviews the level of audit and non-audit fees.', 'The Audit Committee has undertaken a review of all non-audit services provided by the external auditors, and is satisfied that the independence, objectivity and effectiveness of the external auditors are not compromised as a result thereof and has recommended to the Board of Directors that KPMG LLP be nominated for re-appointment as auditors at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting of the Company.', 'We have audited the financial statements of StarHub Ltd (the “Company”) and its subsidiaries (the “Group”), which comprise the consolidated statement of financial position of the Group and the statement of financial position of the Company as at 31 December 2018, the consolidated income statement, consolidated statement of comprehensive income, consolidated statement of changes in equity and consolidated cash flow statement of the Group, and the statement of changes in equity of the Company for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies, as set out on pages 157 to 260.', 'Reporting Standards (International) (“SFRS(I)s”) so as to give a true and fair view of the consolidated financial position of the Group and the financial position of the Company as at 31 December 2018 and of the consolidated financial performance, consolidated changes in equity and consolidated cash flows of the Group, and changes in equity of the Company for the year ended on that date.', 'We conducted our audit in accordance with Singapore Standards on Auditing (“SSAs”).  Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the ‘Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements’ section of our report.  We are independent of the Group in accordance with the Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics for Public Accountants and', 'Accounting Entities (“ACRA Code”) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in Singapore, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and the ACRA Code.  We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.', 'Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period.  These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.', 'The Group uses data captured in network switches and source systems (such as customer record, point of sales), which are interfaced with billing and management IT reporting systems, to recognise revenue. Management relies on a combination of system automated controls and manual controls to ensure the revenue recognition  is appropriate.', 'The Group performed an impairment assessment for each of the CGUs by estimating its recoverable amounts. The recoverable amounts of each CGU has been derived using its discounted cash flow forecast. The recoverable amount for each of the CGUs is determined to be in excess of the carrying amounts of the CGU and no impairment loss is determined to be required.', 'In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.', 'Act and SFRS(I)s, and for devising and maintaining a system of internal accounting controls sufficient to provide a reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded against loss from unauthorised use or disposition; and transactions are properly authorised and that they are recorded as necessary to permit the preparation of true and fair financial statements and to maintain accountability of assets.', 'In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless management either intends to liquidate the Group or to cease operations, or has no realistic alternative but to do so.', 'Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditors’ report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with SSAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.', 'From the matters communicated with the directors, we determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters.  We describe these matters in our auditors’ report unless the law or regulations preclude public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.', 'Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 4 893.2 870.1 918.0 465.1 425.2 431.0Intangible assets 5 670.0 557.6 463.8 102.1 92.3 78.3Subsidiaries 6 – – – 3,304.4 3,112.1 3,077.1Associate 7 22.7 23.7 25.9 27.8 27.8 27.8Other investments 8 36.0 60.0 40.0 36.0 60.0 40.0Amounts due from related parties 9 8.2 7.9 7.6 8.2 7.9 7.6Contract assets 10 67.4 76.7 68.2 0.1 1.0 –Contract costs 10 5.7 5.8 6.2 0.5 0.4 0.8Deferred tax assets 18 1.5 – – – – –', 'Current assetsInventories 11 75.2 71.9 49.6 0.6 0.7 0.7Contract assets 10 277.0 285.0 279.1 18.7 18.4 12.0Contract costs 10 17.3 18.3 17.7 1.4 1.6 2.1Trade receivables 12 282.8 201.5 172.2 183.1 167.7 141.7Other receivables, deposits and prepayments 13 94.2 87.4 96.8 33.9 30.8 35.6Amounts due from related parties 9 18.3 24.9 17.9 14.2 21.6 19.2Cash and cash equivalents 14 166.0 345.2 285.2 117.6 321.1 236.0', 'Current liabilitiesContract liabilities 10 (70.2) (78.6) (94.9) (23.4) (21.0) (21.1)Trade and other payables 15 (574.5) (625.0) (577.0) (270.5) (313.1) (288.1)Amounts due to related parties 9 (57.5) (64.8) (67.1) (235.8) (334.3) (360.5)Borrowings 16 (50.1) (120.0) (10.0) (50.0) (120.0) (10.0)Provision for taxation (119.5) (125.5) (118.7) (23.7) (21.0) (16.0)(871.8) (1,013.9) (867.7) (603.4) (809.4) (695.7)', 'Equity Share capital 19 299.7 299.7 299.7 299.7 299.7 299.7Perpetual capital securities 20 199.9 199.9 – 199.9 199.9 –Reserves 21 28.5 101.9 132.3 2,117.8 2,024.8 2,040.5Equity attributable to owners of the Company 528.1 601.5 432.0 2,617.4 2,524.4 2,340.2Non-controlling interests 59.9 4.4 – – – –Total equity 588.0 605.9 432.0 2,617.4 2,524.4 2,340.2', 'FVOCI, net of taxation – – – – – – (24.0) – – – (24.0) – (24.0)Foreign currency translation differences – – – – – –  – – (0.1) – (0.1) – (0.1)Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges, net of taxation – – – – – – – 9.9 – – 9.9 – 9.9Total comprehensive (loss)/income for the year – – – – – – (24.0) 9.9 (0.1) 201.7 187.5 (1.1) 186.4', 'Accrued perpetual capital securities distribution – 7.9 – – – – – – – (7.9) (7.9) – –Perpetual capital securities distribution paid – (7.9) – – – – – – – 1.3 1.3 – (6.6)Issue of shares pursuant to share plans – – 5.2 – – (5.1) – – – – 0.1 – 0.1Share-based payment expenses – – – – – 1.0 – – – – 1.0 – 1.0Tax impact on transfer of treasury shares – – – – – (0.2) – – – – (0.2) – (0.2)Dividends paid (Note 31) – – – – – – – – – (276.9) (276.9) – (276.9)Total contributions by and distributions to equity holders of the Company – – 5.2 – – (4.3) – – – (283.5) (282.6) – (282.6)', 'Changes in ownership interests in subsidiariesNet effect from business combinations – – – 54.7 – – – – – – 54.7 56.6 111.3Put liability to acquire non-controlling interests – – – (42.7) – – – – – – (42.7) –    (42.7)Net changes in fair value of put liability to acquire non-controlling interests – – – 9.7 – – – – – – 9.7 – 9.7Total changes in ownership interests in subsidiaries – – – 21.7 – – – – – – 21.7 56.6 78.3Total transactions with equity holders of the Company – – 5.2 21.7 – (4.3) – – – (283.5) (260.9) 56.6      (204.3)', 'Other comprehensive income/(loss)Net change in fair value of available-for-sale financial assets, net of taxation – – – – – 5.6 – – – 5.6 – 5.6Foreign currency translation differences – – – – – – – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges, net of taxation – – – – – – (14.5) – – (14.5) – (14.5)Total comprehensive income/(loss) for the year – – – – – 5.6 (14.5) 0.1 272.9 264.1 0.6 264.7', 'Issue of perpetual capital securities – 199.6 – – – – – – – – – 199.6Accrued perpetual capital securities distribution – 4.3 – – – – – – (4.3) (4.3) – –Perpetual capital securities distribution paid – (4.0) – – – – – – 0.7 0.7 – (3.3)Issue of shares pursuant to share plans – – 4.1 – (4.1) – – – – – – –Share-based payment expenses – – – – 3.4 – – – – 3.4 – 3.4Tax impact on transfer of treasury shares – – – – (0.4) – – – – (0.4) – (0.4)Dividends paid (Note 31) – – – – – – – – (293.9) (293.9) – (293.9)Total contributions by and distributions to equity holders of the Company – 199.9 4.1 – (1.1) – – – (297.5) (294.5) – (94.6)', 'Accrued perpetual securities distribution – 7.9 – – – (7.9) (7.9) –Perpetual securities distribution paid – (7.9) – – – 1.3 1.3 (6.6)Issue of shares pursuant to share plans – – 5.2 (5.1) – – 0.1 0.1Share-based payment expenses – – – 1.0 – – 1.0 1.0Tax impact on transfer of treasury shares – – – (0.2) – – (0.2) (0.2)Dividends paid (Note 31) – – – – – (276.9) (276.9) (276.9)Total transactions with equity holders of the Company – – 5.2 (4.3) – (283.5) (282.6) (282.6)At 31 December 2018 299.7 199.9 (3.0) 8.7 (5.9) 2,118.0 2,117.8 2,617.4', 'Issue of perpetual capital securities – 199.6 – – – – – 199.6Accrued perpetual securities distribution – 4.3 – – – (4.3) (4.3) –Perpetual securities distribution paid – (4.0) – – – 0.7 0.7 (3.3)Issue of shares pursuant to share plans – – 4.1 (4.1) – – – –Share-based payment expenses – – – 3.4 – – 3.4 3.4Tax impact on transfer of treasury shares – – – (0.4) – – (0.4) (0.4)Dividends paid (Note 31) – – – – – (293.9) (293.9) (293.9)Total transactions with equity holders of the Company – 199.9 4.1 (1.1) – (297.5) (294.5) (94.6)At 31 December 2017 299.7 199.9 (8.2) 13.0 18.1 2,001.9 2,024.8 2,524.4', 'Cash flow from investing activitiesInterest received 3.1 3.4Proceeds from disposal of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets 0.4 1.9Purchase of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets (272.8) (295.9)Purchase of equity investments – (15.0)Acquisition of subsidiary, net of cash acquired (Note 33) (65.4) (22.6)Repayment of loan from an associate – 1.1Net cash used in investing activities (334.7) (327.1)', '1 Domicile and Activities StarHub Ltd (“StarHub” or the “Company”) is incorporated in the Republic of Singapore and has its registered office at 67 Ubi Avenue 1, #05-01 StarHub Green, Singapore 408942. The principal activities of the Company are those relating to the operation and provision of telecommunications services and other businesses relating to the info-communications industry. The principal activities of the subsidiaries are set out in Note 6 to the financial statements. The consolidated financial statements relate to the Company and its subsidiaries (together the “Group” and individually as “Group entities”), and the Group’s interest in its equity-accounted investee.', 'Financial Reporting Standards (International) has been applied. In the previous financial years, the financial statements were prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standards in Singapore (“FRS”).  An explanation of how the transition to SFRS(I) and application of SFRS(I) 9 and SFRS(I) 15 have affected the reported financial position, financial performance and cash flows is provided in Note 38.', '2.4 Significant accounting estimates and judgements (continued)•  Measurement of expected credit loss (“ECL”) allowance for trade and other receivables and contract assets The Group evaluates whether there is any objective evidence that trade receivables, amounts due from related parties and contract assets are impaired and determines the amount of loss allowances as a result of the inability of the debtors to make the required payments. The Group bases the estimates by applying a provision matrix incorporating both historical and forward-looking statements. The Group has a policy to provide allowance for receivable balances on specific individual balances and on its receivables portfolio collectively.  If financial conditions of the debtors were to deteriorate, actual write-offs would be higher than that estimated. •  Revenue recognition – Determining the transaction price, stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) and the amounts allocated to performance obligations Determining the transaction price requires the Group to make judgments and estimates on variable considerations in the contract.', 'Management estimates the amount of variable consideration based on historical, current and forecasted information using most likely or expected value method. Determination of the variable consideration is subjective as the Group has a practice of offering a broad range of price concessions and the fact that variable consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside the Group’s influence. Changes in customer’s expectation and Group’s intent, as well as the method used in quantifying the amount of variable consideration may affect the amount of revenue recognised in the Group’s income statements in the future. Transaction price is allocated in proportion to the estimated SSP for each performance obligation at the inception of the contract.', 'Therefore, management estimates the SSP of each performance obligation, especially those goods or services that are not regularly offered separately to customers. The Group establishes SSP using observable price or in case observable price is not available, the estimated cost plus a reasonable margin for each identified performance obligation. If both observable price or cost plus method is not available, SSP is determined based on residual method. Change or absence of SSP of a performance obligation affects the amount of consideration allocated to each performance obligation. Variable considerations are allocated solely to the service component of the contract since they relate specifically to the effort to satisfy the service performance obligation. The Group operates loyalty programmes that provide various discounts on future goods or services. A portion of revenue is allocated to these discounts and deferred until they are redeemed or expire. The deferment of revenue is estimated based on historical redemption rates and values, adjusted for any anticipated changes in future periods. As actual redemption rates may differ, the estimates are reviewed and adjusted where necessary in each reporting period when determining the amount of revenue to be deferred.', '2.4 Significant accounting estimates and judgements (continued)• Adequacy of accruals Assessing the adequacy of accruals made at the reporting date requires the Group to make judgements in determining the level of accruals needed for costs that span the year end where settlement has not been fully and finally made. Due to the complexities in the telecommunication industry, agreement on amounts payable to suppliers may take a significant amount of time. The Group determines the sufficiency of these accruals based on historical trend of observable claims and actual costs.  Actual payments may differ from these estimates when the final settlements are reached between the parties.• Acquisition of subsidiaries (see Note 33) -  determination of fair value of consideration transferred (including contingent consideration, if any) and fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed; and -  determination of the fair value of put options granted to non-controlling interests. Management has engaged external firms of specialists to perform the purchase price allocation, including valuation of the identified assets and liabilities. There is judgement and inherent uncertainty involved in the identification and valuation of these assets and liabilities.', '3. Significant Accounting Policies The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these financial statements and in preparing the opening SFRS(I) statements of financial position as at 1 January 2017 for the purposes of the transition to SFRS(I), unless otherwise indicated. The accounting policies have been applied consistently by Group entities.', '3.1 Basis of consolidation(i) Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method in accordance with SFRS(I) 3 Business Combinations as at the date of acquisition, which is the date when control is transferred to the Group.  Acquisitions from 1 January 2017 The consideration transferred does not include amounts related to the settlement of pre-existing relationships. Such amounts are generally recognised in the income statement.', '3.1 Basis of consolidation (continued)(i) Business combinations (continued) Acquisitions from 1 January 2017 (continued) Any contingent consideration payable is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date and included in the consideration transferred. If the contingent consideration that meets the definition of a financial instrument is classified as equity, it is not remeasured and settlement is accounted for within equity. Otherwise, other contingent consideration is remeasured at fair value at each reporting date and subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration are recognised in income statement.  Non-controlling interests that are present ownership interests and entitle their holders to a proportionate share of the acquiree’s net assets in the event of liquidation are measured either at fair value or at the non-controlling interests’ proportionate share of the recognised amounts of the acquiree’s identifiable net assets, at the date of acquisition. The measurement basis taken is elected on a transaction-by-transaction basis. All other non-controlling interests are measured at acquisition date at fair value, unless another measurement basis is required by SFRS(I)s.  Costs related to the acquisition, other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities, that the Group incurs in connection with a business combination are expensed as incurred.  Changes in the Group’s interest in a subsidiary that do not result in a loss of control are accounted for as transactions with owners in their capacity as owners and therefore no adjustments are made to goodwill and no gain or loss is recognised in the income statement.', 'Adjustments to non-controlling interests arising from transactions that do not involve the loss of control are based on a proportionate amount of the net assets of the subsidiary.  Acquisitions before 1 January 2017 As part of the transition to SFRS(I), the Group has elected not to restate those business combinations that occurred before the date of transition to SFRS(I), i.e. 1 January 2017.  Goodwill arising from acquisition before 1 January 2017 has been carried forward from the previous FRS framework as at the date of transition.(ii) Subsidiaries Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group. The Group controls an entity when it is exposed to, or has rights to, variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity. The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases. The accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed when necessary to align them with the policies adopted by the Group.', '3.1 Basis of consolidation (continued)(v) Investment in associates (continued) When the Group’s share of losses exceeds its interest in an equity-accounted investee, the carrying amount of the investment, together with any long-term interests that form part thereof is reduced to zero, and the recognition of further losses is discontinued except to the extent that the Group has an obligation to fund the investee’s operations or has made payments on behalf of the investee.(vi) Transactions eliminated on consolidation Intra-group balances and transactions, and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intra-group transactions, are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Unrealised gains arising from transactions with equity-accounted investees are eliminated against the investment to the extent of the', 'Group’s interest in the investee.  Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains, but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.(vii) Subsidiaries and associates in the separate financial statements Investments in subsidiaries and associates are stated in the Company’s statement of financial position at cost less impairment losses.', 'The cost of the Company’s investment in certain subsidiaries at 1 January 2017, the Group’s date of transition to SFRS(I), was determined with reference to their respective fair values at that date. (viii) Put and call options with non-controlling interest  When an entity within the Group writes a put option with the non-controlling shareholders as part of the acquisition of a subsidiary for settlement in cash or in another financial asset, a put liability is recognised for the present value of the exercise price of the option. This creates an obligation or potential obligation for the entity to purchase its subsidiary’s equity instruments (constitutes the Group’s own equity in the consolidated financial statements) for cash or another financial asset.  When the non-controlling shareholders still have present access to the returns associated with the underlying ownership interests, the', 'Group has chosen an accounting policy in which the non-controlling shareholders continue to be recognised. Therefore, the present value of the option is recognised in equity. Subsequent to initial recognition of the financial liability, changes in the carrying amount of the financial liability is recognised within equity.  If the put option expires unexercised, then the charge to equity will be reversed and the financial liability will be derecognised. If the put option is exercised, then the charge to equity will be reversed and the financial liability will be derecognised and acquisition accounting will be applied.  At the Company level, the put and call options are accounted for as embedded derivatives.', '3.2 Foreign currencies(i) Foreign currencies transactions Transactions in foreign currencies are translated to the respective functional currencies of Group entities at exchange rates at the dates of the transactions.  Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated to the functional currency at the exchange rate at that date. The foreign currency gain or loss on monetary items is the difference between amortised cost in the functional currency at the beginning of the year, adjusted for effective interest and payments during the year, and the amortised cost in foreign currency translated at the exchange rate at the end of the year.  Non-monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies that are measured at fair value are translated to the functional currency at the exchange rate at the date that the fair value was determined. Non-monetary items in a foreign currency that are measured in terms of historical cost are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.   Foreign currency differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement, except for the differences arising on the translation of qualifying cash flow hedges to the extent the hedge is effective, which are recognised in other comprehensive income.(ii) Foreign operations The assets and liabilities of foreign operations, including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on acquisition, are translated to', 'Singapore dollars at exchange rates at the reporting date.  The income and expenses of foreign operations are translated to Singapore dollars at the dates of the transactions. Foreign currency translation differences are recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the foreign currency translation reserve in equity.  However, if the foreign operation is a non-wholly-owned subsidiary, then the relevant proportionate share of the translation difference is allocated to the non-controlling interests.  When a foreign subsidiary is disposed of such that control is lost, the cumulative amount in the foreign currency translation reserve related to that foreign subsidiary is transferred to the income statement as an adjustment to profit or loss arising on disposal.  When the Group disposes of only part of its interest in a subsidiary that includes a foreign operation while retaining control, the relevant proportion of the cumulative amount is reattributed to non-controlling interests.', '3.3 Property, plant and equipment(i) Recognition and measurement Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset.  The cost of self-constructed assets include the cost of materials and direct labour, any other costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to a working condition for their intended use, and when the Group has an obligation to remove the asset or restore the site, an estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the assets and restoring the site on which they are located, and capitalised borrowing costs.', '3.3 Property, plant and equipment (continued)(i) Recognition and measurement (continued) When parts of an item of property, plant and equipment have different useful lives, they are accounted for as separate item (major components) of property, plant and equipment. Gains or losses arising from the retirement or disposal of property, plant and equipment are determined as the difference between the estimated net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and are recognised in the income statement on the date of retirement or disposal.(ii) Subsequent costs Subsequent expenditure relating to existing property, plant and equipment is added to the carrying amount of the asset when it is probable that future economic benefits, in excess of the originally assessed standard of performance of the existing asset, will flow to the', 'Group and its cost can be measured reliably. The carrying amount of the replaced component is derecognised. The costs of the day-to-day servicing of property, plant and equipment are recognised in the income statement as incurred.(iii) Depreciation Depreciation is based on the cost of an asset less its residual value. Significant components of individual assets are assessed and if a component has a useful life that is different from the remainder of the asset, that component is depreciated separately. Depreciation is recognised as an expense in the income statement on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives (or lease term, if shorter) of each part of an item of property, plant and equipment as follows: Leasehold buildings  - 30 years to 57 years Leasehold improvements - Shorter of lease term or 5 years Network equipment and infrastructure - 2 years to 15 years Office equipment, computers and furniture and fittings - 2 years to 5 years Motor vehicles - 5 years Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed, and adjusted as appropriate, at the end of each reporting date. No depreciation is provided on freehold property or in respect of property, plant and equipment under construction.', '3.4 Intangible assets(i) Goodwill Goodwill that arises upon the acquisition of subsidiaries is included in intangible assets. Acquisitions before 1 January 2017 Goodwill and negative goodwill arising from business acquisitions have been accounted for as follows: •  Prior to 1 January 2001, both goodwill and negative goodwill were taken directly to retained profits.•  Between 1 January 2001 to 31 December 2004, goodwill was stated at cost less amortisation. Negative goodwill was taken directly to retained profits.•  After 31 December 2004, goodwill was stated at cost less impairment while negative goodwill was taken to the income statement. Acquisitions after 1 January 2017 Goodwill at the acquisition date represents the excess of:•  the fair value of the consideration transferred; plus•  the recognised amount of any non-controlling interests in the acquiree; plus •  if the business combination is achieved in stages, the fair value of the pre-existing equity interest in the acquiree over the net recognised amount (generally fair value) of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. When the excess is negative, a bargain purchase gain is recognised immediately in the income statement. Goodwill is measured at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis as described in', 'Note 3.7(ii). Goodwill that has previously been taken to the reserves is not taken to the income statement when the business is disposed of or the goodwill is impaired.  Similarly, negative goodwill that has previously been taken to reserves is not taken to the income statement when the business is disposed. In respect of associates, the carrying amount of goodwill is included in the carrying amount of the investment, and an impairment loss on such an investment is not allocated to any asset, including goodwill, that forms part of the carrying amount of the associates. As part of the transition to SFRS(I), the Group elected not to restate those business combinations that occurred before the date of transition to SFRS(I), i.e. 1 January 2017.  Goodwill arising from acquisitions before 1 January 2017 has been carried forward from previous FRS framework as at the date of transition.', '3.4 Intangible assets (continued)(ii) Telecommunications and spectrum licences Telecommunications and spectrum licences costs incurred are measured at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses. These costs are amortised to the income statement using the straight-line method over the period of the licence, being 10 years to 21 years, commencing from the effective date of the licence.(iii) Computer software Computer software comprises software purchased from third parties, and also the cost of internally developed software. Computer software is stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses. These costs are amortised to the income statement using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives of 2 years to 5 years. Subsequent expenditure on capitalised intangible assets is added to the carrying value only when it increases the future economic benefits embodied in the specific asset to which it relates. All other expenditure is recognised in the income statement as incurred. Computer software integral to a related item of equipment is accounted for as property, plant and equipment.(iv) Deferred development costs Deferred development activities involve a plan or design for the production of new or substantially improved products and processes.', 'Deferred development expenditure is capitalised only if development costs can be measured reliably, the product or process is technically and commercially feasible, future economic benefits are probable, and the Group intends to and has sufficient resources to complete development and to use or sell the asset. The expenditure capitalised includes the cost of materials, direct labour, overhead costs that are directly attributable to preparing the asset for its intended use, and capitalised borrowing costs. Other development expenditure is recognised in the income statement as incurred. Capitalised development expenditure is measured at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses. These costs are amortised over 7 to 20 years.(v) Customer contracts and relationships Customer contracts and relationships are acquired in business combinations and carried at fair value at the date of acquisition, and amortised to the income statement using either the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of 3 to 15.5 years, or when there is a high correlation with the revenue and margin to be generated, based on units of production method. Amortisation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each financial year end and adjusted if appropriate.', '3.5 Inventories Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value. The cost of goods held for resale is determined on the weighted average basis.  Cost comprises all costs of purchase, costs of conversion and other costs incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.  In the case of manufactured inventories and work-in-progress, cost includes an appropriate share of production overheads based on normal operating capacity. Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less the estimated costs necessary to make the sale.', 'Allowance for obsolescence is made for all deteriorated, damaged, obsolete and slow-moving inventories. Gross amounts due for contract work Gross amounts due for contract work represent the gross unbilled amount expected to be collected from customers for contract work performed to date. It is measured at cost plus profit recognised to date less progress billings and recognised losses. Cost includes all expenditure related directly to specific projects and an allocation of fixed and variable overheads incurred in the Group’s contract activities. Gross amounts due for contract work are presented as part of assets in the statement of financial position for all contracts in which costs incurred plus recognised profits exceed progress billings. If progress billings exceed costs incurred plus recognised profits, the difference is presented as part of trade and other payables in the statement of financial position. When it is probable that total contract costs will exceed total contract revenue, the expected loss is recognised as an expense immediately.', '3.6 Financial instruments Non-derivative financial instruments(i) Recognition and initial measurement Non-derivative financial instruments comprise investments in equity securities, trade and other receivables (including amounts due from related parties), cash and bank balances, trade and other payables (including amounts due to related parties), and borrowings. Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances, deposits with financial institutions with maturities of three months or less, and bank overdrafts.  For the purpose of presentation in the consolidated cash flow statement, cash and cash equivalents are presented net of bank overdrafts which are repayable on demand and which form an integral part of the Group’s cash management.', '3.6 Financial instruments (continued) Non-derivative financial instruments (continued) (i) Recognition and initial measurement (continued) A financial instrument is recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.  Financial assets are derecognised when the Group’s contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial assets expire or if the Group transfers the financial asset to another party without retaining control or transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the asset. On disposal of a financial asset, the difference between the sale proceeds and the carrying amount is recognised in the income statement.', '3.6 Financial instruments (continued) Non-derivative financial instruments (continued) (iv) Share capital Ordinary shares Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of ordinary shares are recognised as a deduction from equity, net of any tax effects. Perpetual Capital Securities The Group’s perpetual securities do not have a maturity date, and the Company is able to elect to defer making a distribution subject to the terms and conditions of the securities issue. Accordingly, the Company is not considered to have a contractual obligation to make principal repayments or distributions in respect of its perpetual capital securities issue. The perpetual securities are presented within equity.  Discretionary dividends thereon are recognised as equity distributions on approval by the Company’s shareholders. Costs directly attributable to the issue of the perpetual capital securities are deducted against the proceeds from the issue. Repurchase, disposal and reissue of share capital (treasury shares) When share capital recognised as equity is repurchased, the amount of the consideration paid, which includes directly attributable costs, net of any tax effects, is recognised as a deduction from equity. Repurchased shares are classified as treasury shares and are presented in the reserve for own share account. When treasury shares are sold or reissued subsequently, the amount received is recognised as an increase in equity, and the resulting surplus or deficit on the transaction is presented in non-distributable capital reserve.', 'SFRS(I) 15). Loss allowances of the Group are measured on either of the following bases:•  12-month ECLs: these are ECLs that result from default events that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date (or for shorter period if the expected life of the instrument is less than 12 months); or•  Lifetime ECLs: these are ECLs that result from all possible default events over the expected life of a financial instrument or contract assets.', '3.7 Impairment (continued)(i) Non-derivative financial assets and contract assets (continued) Policy applicable before 1 January 2018  A financial asset not carried at FVTPL was assessed at the end of each reporting period to determine whether there was objective evidence that it was impaired. A financial asset was impaired if objective evidence indicated that a loss event(s) had occurred after the initial recognition of the asset, and that the loss event(s) had an impact on the estimated future cash flows of that asset that could be estimated reliably. Objective evidence that financial assets (including equity investments) were impaired included default or delinquency by a debtor, restructuring of an amount due to the Group on terms that the Group would not consider otherwise, indications that a debtor or issuer will enter bankruptcy, adverse changes in the payment status of borrowers or issuers, economic conditions that correlate with defaults or the disappearance of an active market for a security.  In addition, for an investment in an equity security, a significant or prolonged decline in its fair value below its cost is objective evidence of impairment.  Loans and receivables and contract assets The Group considers evidence of impairment for loans and receivables and contract assets at both a specific asset and collective level.', '3.8 Employee benefits(i) Share-based payment Performance Share Plans and Restricted Stock Plans The Performance Share Plans and the Restricted Stock Plans are accounted as equity-settled share-based payments. Equity-settled share-based payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant. The share-based expense is amortised and recognised in the income statement on a straight line basis over the vesting period. At each reporting date, the Company revises its estimates of the number of shares that the participating employees and directors are expected to receive based on non-market vesting conditions. The difference is charged or credited to the income statement, with a corresponding adjustment to equity.(ii) Defined contribution plans Contributions to defined contribution plans are recognised as an expense in the income statement in the periods during which related service are rendered by employees.(iii) Other short-term benefits Short-term employee benefit obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the related service is provided.(iv) Other long-term benefits Long-term employee benefit obligations are measured on performance conditions over a period of three years. The Group adopts an incentive compensation plan, which is tied to the creation of Economic Value Added (“EVA”) for its management personnel executives. An EVA bank is used to hold incentive compensation credited in any year. Typically, one-third of the accumulated', 'EVA-based bonus, comprising the EVA declared in the financial year and the balance of such bonus brought forward from preceding years is paid out in cash each year, with the balance being carried forward to the following year. The balances of the EVA bank in future will be adjusted by the yearly EVA performance of the Group and the payouts made from the EVA bank.', '3.9 Customer loyalty programmes For customer loyalty programmes, the fair value of the consideration received or receivable from a sales transaction which attracts customer loyalty credits or points is allocated between the customer loyalty points and the other component of the sale. The amount allocated to the customer loyalty points is estimated by reference to the fair value of the customer loyalty points for which they could be redeemed. The fair value of the customer loyalty points is estimated by taking into account the expected redemption rate and the timing of such expected redemptions. Such amount is deferred and recorded as contract liability until the customer loyalty points are redeemed.  At this juncture, the cost of fulfilling the customer loyalty credits is also recognised.', '3.10 Provisions Provisions are recognised in the statement of financial position when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event, and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of obligation. If the effect is material, provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and, where appropriate, the risks specific to the liability.', '3.11 Revenue recognition (continued) Any difference between the revenue recognised in relation to the satisfied performance obligation and the amount of consideration received or receivable is presented either as contract asset or contract liability.  Contract asset represents the Group’s right to consideration, excluding any amount presented as trade receivable, in exchange for the goods or services transferred to customers.', 'Contract liability, on the other hand represents the Group’s obligation to transfer goods and services to a customer for which the Group has received consideration from the customer.  Variable consideration Certain contracts with customers include variable considerations like right of return, trade discounts or rebates. Currently, the Group recognises revenue from the sale of goods measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable, net of returns and allowance, trade discounts and certain rebates. Under SFRS(I) 15, such provisions will be estimated at contract inception and at every reporting period, adjusted against revenue. Material right Under SFRS(I) 15, options to acquire additional goods or services represent separate performance obligations if they provide the customer a material right that the customer would not otherwise receive. In these cases, revenue from the contract is deferred and recognised when future goods and services are transferred or when the option expires. The transaction price is allocated to performance obligations (including the option) based on relative SSP. Contract modification Changes in scope or price (or both) of a contract that is approved by parties to the contract are contract modifications. SFRS(I) 15 prescribes the treatments of contract modifications depending on the attributes of the modification and the remaining goods and/or services. Contract cost SFRS(I) 15 requires the incremental costs of obtaining a contract to be recognised as an asset if the entity expects to recover those costs.  Those incremental costs are limited to the costs that the entity would not have incurred if the contract had not been successfully obtained. The Group has applied the practical expedient, where the incremental costs of obtaining a contract is expensed if the associated amortisation period is 12 months or less.', '3.12 Finance income and costs Finance income comprises interest income on bank deposits and amount due from associate.  Interest income is recognised using the effective interest method. Finance costs comprise interest expense and similar charges.  They are recognised in the income statement using the effective interest method, except to the extent that they are capitalised as being directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of an asset which necessarily takes a substantial period of time to prepare for its intended use or sale.', '3.13 Government grants Government grants received, which are designated for the purchase of property, plant and equipment, are accreted to the income statement on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the related assets, so as to match the related depreciation expense. Government grants received, which are designated for operating expenditure, are recognised on a systematic basis in the income statement over the periods necessary to match the related cost which they are intended to compensate. Other government grants are recognised in the income statement when there is reasonable assurance that the Company has complied with the attached conditions and the amount will be received.', '3.15 Operating leases Where the Group has the use of assets under operating leases, payments made under the leases are recognised in the income statement on a straight-line basis over the terms of the lease. Lease incentives received are recognised in the income statement as an integral part of the total lease payments made. Contingent rentals are charged to the income statement in the accounting period in which they are incurred.', '3.16 Income taxes Income taxes comprise current tax and deferred tax.  Income taxes are recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity, in which case such tax is recognised in equity, or in other comprehensive income. The Group has determined that interest and penalties related to income taxes, including uncertain tax treatments, do not meet the definition of income taxes, and therefore accounted for them under SFRS (I) 1-37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets. Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year, using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date, and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.  Deferred tax is recognised in respect of temporary differences at the balance sheet date arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements. Deferred tax is provided based on the expected realisation or settlement of the temporary differences, using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.', '3.16 Income taxes (continued) Deferred tax assets and liabilities are not recognised for:• temporary differences on the initial recognition of assets or liabilities in a transaction that is not a business combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss;• temporary differences relating to investments in subsidiaries and associate to the extent that the Group is able to control the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future; and• taxable temporary differences on the initial recognition of goodwill. A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised. Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.', '3.18 Segment reporting Segment information is presented based on the information reviewed by chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) for performance assessment and resource allocation. The Group operates primarily in Singapore and delivers its Mobile, Pay TV, Broadband, Enterprise Fixed revenue and equipment sales on an operationally integrated network and is also involved in the provision of high security customer products, and cyber security services.', '3.19 New standards and interpretations not yet adopted A number of new standards, amendments to standards and interpretations are not yet effective and have not been applied in preparing these financial statements.  An explanation of the impact, if any, on adoption of these new requirements is provided in Note 39.', 'CostAt 1 January 2017 1.7 9.2 46.3 3,470.9 176.6 6.9 56.4 3,768.0Acquisition through business combination – – 0.1 – 1.7 – – 1.8Additions – – – 1.7 15.9 1.3 165.3 184.2Transfers – 1.1 7.7 173.0 – – (181.8) –Disposals/Write-offs – – (7.2) (302.8) (4.0) (0.3) – (314.3)At 31 December 2017 1.7 10.3 46.9 3,342.8 190.2 7.9 39.9 3,639.7', 'At 1 January 2018 1.7 10.3 46.9 3,342.8 190.2 7.9 39.9 3,639.7Acquisitions through business combination – 4.2 2.0 0.1 9.7 – 2.0 18.0Additions – 30.8 0.7 1.2 11.3 0.9 215.6 260.5Transfers – – 0.7 176.5 1.5 – (178.7) –Disposals/Write-offs – – (1.8) (132.8) (1.4) (0.7) – (136.7)At 31 December 2018 1.7 45.3 48.5 3,387.8 211.3 8.1 78.8 3,781.5', 'At 1 January 2018 – 2.6 39.3 2,568.4 153.4 5.9 – 2,769.6Charge for the year – 1.1 2.9 207.7 16.1 0.6 – 228.4Impairment loss – – – 2.6 – – – 2.6Disposals/Write-offs – – (1.8) (108.4) (1.4) (0.7) – (112.3)At 31 December 2018 – 3.7 40.4 2,670.3 168.1 5.8 – 2,888.3', 'Carrying amountAt 1 January 2017 1.7 6.9 2.4 816.6 32.8 1.2 56.4 918.0At 31 December 2017 1.7 7.7 7.6 774.4 36.8 2.0 39.9 870.1At 31 December 2018 1.7 41.6 8.1 717.5 43.2 2.3 78.8 893.2 Staff costs capitalised in construction in progress for the Group during the year amounted to $3.5 million (2017: $3.3 million).  During the year, the Group assessed that certain network equipment was impaired based on value-in-use method due to changes in the operating environment and recorded an impairment loss of $2.6 million. Non-cash transaction During the year, the Group entered into an asset swap arrangement with a vendor to exchange certain of its network equipment.  Assets obtained were recorded at their fair value of $24.4 million which approximated the carrying amounts of the assets that were swapped out.', 'Impairment testing for CGUs containing goodwill The following represents the lowest level within the Group at which goodwill is monitored for impairment for internal management purposes.•  The Group, through its “Hubbing” strategy, operates and delivers its Mobile, Pay TV, Broadband and Enterprise Fixed services on an operationally integrated network, customer service, sales, marketing and administration support.  Accordingly, the Group’s integrated fixed, mobile, cable and broadband operations is considered one CGU (“Telco CGU”). •  In January 2018, the acquisition of D’Crypt Pte Ltd (“DPL”) was completed.  The entity generates independent cash inflows and is a', 'InfoSecurity Pte. Ltd. (“Ensign”) for purposes of undertaking a cyber-security business with end-to-end capabilities (see Note 33(ii) for details of the transaction). The Group’s cyber security segment (the “Ensign Group”) is assessed to be a separate CGU.  The carrying amount of the Group’s goodwill as at 31 December 2018 were assessed for impairment during the financial year and attributed to the respective CGUs.', '315.5 239.5*  Includes goodwill arising from acquisition of controlling interests in EIS in prior year.  The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are determined based on value-in-use calculations. The value-in-use calculations apply a discounted cash flow model using cash flow projections based on financial budgets and forecasts approved by management.  The', 'Group has used cash flow projections of five years.  Cash flows beyond the fifth year are extrapolated using the forecast long-term growth rates.  Key assumptions used in the estimation of value-in-use were as follows:•  The discount rates applied to the cash flow projections are based on Weighted Average Cost of Capital (“WACC”) calculated using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (“CAPM”).', 'NA: not applicable•  The terminal growth rates used is nil%. •  Growth rates and EBITDA margins take into consideration competitive pressures in the industry.  As at 31 December 2017 and 2018, no impairment charge was required for the carrying amount of goodwill as the recoverable values were in excess of their carrying amount. A reasonable change to the key assumptions applied is not likely to cause the recoverable values to be below their carrying amount.', '36.0 60.0 40.0 In 2017, the Company and the Group acquired additional interest in the equity security which resulted in the recognition of a day one fair value loss arising on initial acquisition of $0.7 million (see Note 26). Equity investments designed as at FVOCI At 1 January 2018, the Group designated the investments shown above as equity investments at FVOCI because these equity investments represent investments that the Group intends to hold long-term for strategic purposes. In 2017, these investments were classified as available-for-sale. No strategic investments was disposed during 2018, and there was no transfer of any cumulative gain or loss within equity relating to these investments.', '9.1 Amounts due from related parties (continued) Current Included in current amounts due from subsidiaries are amounts of $64.6 million (2017: $nil, 1 January 2017: $nil) from certain subsidiaries which are unsecured, bear interest of 7.75% (2017: nil%, 1 January 2017: nil%) per annum and are repayable on demand. In 2017, current loans to an associate were unsecured and bore interest rates between 2.86% to 2.96% per annum. These loans were repaid in 2017.  All other amounts are unsecured, interest-free and repayable on demand. They are classified as current and measured at amortised cost.   During the year, the Company impaired balances owing by certain subsidiaries amounting to $174.4 million (2017: $216.7 million was impaired and forgiven).  Other than above, there is no allowance for doubtful debts arising from these outstanding balances with ultimate holding company, subsidiaries and related corporations as the ECL is not material.  Non-current The non-current loan to associate is unsecured, bears interest rate of 3.53% (2017: 3.53%) per annum and is repayable in June 2021.', '57.5 64.8 67.1 235.8 334.3 360.5 Included in current amounts due to subsidiaries are:(i) Amounts of $153.6 million (2017: $77.2 million, 1 January 2017: $163.8 million) which are unsecured, interest-free and repayable on demand.(ii) Amounts of $57.3 million (2017: $87.4 million, 1 January 2017: $nil) placed by certain subsidiaries with the Company under a cash pooling arrangement.', '1.30% (1 January 2017: 0.95% to 1.73%) per annum and were repayable on demand. Amounts due to related corporations and associates are unsecured, interest-free and repayable on demand.  In 2017, the amount due to non-controlling interest was unsecured, interest-free and was repaid in 2018 based on the terms in the sale and purchase agreement to acquire EIS.', '344.4 361.7 18.8 19.4 The Group uses an allowance matrix to measure the ECL of contract assets. In determining the ECL, the Group has taken into account the historical termination write-off experience of the corporate and consumer customer bases, adjusted for factors based on the Group’s view of economic conditions over the remaining lifetime of future performance obligations.', 'At beginning of year  101.0 116.5 43.5 42.7Revenue recognised that was included in the contract liability balance at the beginning of the year (76.6) (92.5) (19.2) (19.2)Cash received, excluding amounts recognised as revenue during  the year 0.4 3.2 – 0.7Billings in advance, excluding amounts recognised as revenue  during the year 77.8 73.8 31.6 19.3Additions through business combinations 0.1 – – –', '23.0 24.1 23.9 1.9 2.0 2.9 Costs to obtain contracts relate to commission fees paid to dealers as a result of obtaining mobile, pay TV and broadband service contracts. These costs are amortised on a straight-line basis over the contract period. In 2018, amortisation amounting to $24.1 million (2017: $24.1 million) was recognised as marketing and promotion expenses in income statement. There was no loss allowance in relation to the costs capitalised.', '282.8 201.5 183.1 167.7 The trade receivables of the Company include amounts billed under a combined billing arrangement to customers for services provided by certain subsidiaries. The Group uses an allowance matrix to measure the ECL of trade receivables. In the assessment of ECL, the Group applies the simplified approach and uses the practical expedient to estimate the loss allowance based on aging buckets of the trade receivables, adjusted for certain external indices to different groups between consumer and corporate customers, where applicable. The following table details the risk profile of trade receivables from contracts with customers based on the Group’s provision matrix.', 'Fixed deposits 86.2 274.0 84.2 273.5Cash at bank and in hand 79.8 71.2 33.4 47.6Cash and cash equivalents in the statement of financial position 166.0 345.2 117.6 321.1Restricted cash (0.6) – – –Cash and cash equivalents in the cash flow statement 165.4 345.2 117.6 321.1 Fixed deposits relate to deposits with financial institutions with maturities of three months or less with effective interest rates ranging from', '0.35% to 3.84% (2017: 0.35% to 1.88%) per annum. At the reporting date, cash and cash equivalents of the Company include $57.3 million (2017: $87.4 million) cash from certain subsidiaries pooled together and managed centrally by the Company in bank balances and fixed deposits as part of the Group’s cash management and treasury activities.  Restricted cash was set aside for performance bonds with customers.', '16.2 Medium term notes The Company has established a multicurrency medium term note programme with a maximum aggregate principal amount of  $1,000.0 million in September 2011. In September 2012, the Company issued a $220.0 million 10-year medium term note which bears interest rate of 3.08% per annum and is repayable in September 2022. In June 2016, the Company issued a $300.0 million 10-year medium term note which bears interest of 3.55% per annum and is repayable in June 2026.  On 29 May 2017, the Company has updated and amended its $1,000.0 million multicurrency medium term note programme to a $2,000.0 million multicurrency debt issuance programme with the inclusion of the mechanism for the issuance of, and the terms and conditions of, perpetual securities.  The amendments do not affect the validity of the existing term notes issued by the Company under the original programme. As at 31 December 2018, the fair value of the medium term notes are $517.6 million (2017: $533.9 million).', 'Deferred grants to be accreted:Current (within 1 year) 15 0.8 0.9 0.6 0.9Non-current (after 1 year but within 5 years) 15 0.3 0.9 0.3 0.9Total 1.1 1.8 0.9 1.8 Deferred income refers to government grants received.  Assets related grants are recognised over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.  Income related grants are recognised on a systematic basis over the periods to match the related costs.', 'Deferred tax liabilitiesProperty, plant and equipment and intangible assets (149.2) 16.3 –     – (9.6) (142.5)Other payables and accruals 9.1 0.2 – – – 9.3Contract assets 1.2 (0.1) – – – 1.1Derivatives 2.0 – (2.0) – – –Share-based payment transactions 1.5 (0.7) – (0.2) – 0.6Total (135.4) 15.7 (2.0) (0.2) (9.6) (131.5)', '2017Deferred tax liabilitiesProperty, plant and equipment and intangible assets (152.6) 5.4 – – (2.0) (149.2)Other payables and accruals 2.4 6.7 – – – 9.1Contract assets 1.1 0.1 – – – 1.2Derivatives (1.0) – 3.0 – – 2.0Share-based payment transactions 2.1 (0.3) – (0.3) – 1.5Total (148.0) 11.9 3.0 (0.3) (2.0) (135.4) Unrecognised deferred tax assets Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that realisation of the related tax benefits through future taxable profits is probable. Deferred tax assets have not been recognised in respect of the following items:', 'Issued and fully paid ordinary shares:At beginning and end of year 1,731,651 299.7 1,731,651 299.7 The holders of ordinary shares (excluding treasury shares) are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.  All ordinary shares (excluding treasury shares) rank equally with regard to the', '20 Perpetual Capital Securities On 16 June 2017, the Company issued subordinated perpetual securities (the “perpetual securities”) with an aggregate principal amount of $200 million. Incremental costs incurred amounting to $0.4 million was recognised in equity as a deduction from the proceeds. Such perpetual securities bear distributions at a rate of 3.95% per annum, payable semi-annually. Subject to the relevant terms and conditions in the offering memorandum, the Company may elect to defer making distributions on the perpetual securities and is not subject to any limits as to the number of times a distribution can be deferred.  As a result, the perpetual securities do not meet the definition for classification as a financial liability under SFRS(I) 32 Financial Instruments: Disclosure and Presentation. The whole instrument is presented within equity, and distributions are treated as dividends.   During the financial year, distributions amounting to $7.9 million (2017: $4.3 million) were accrued to perpetual security holders of which $7.9 million (2017: $4.0 million) has been paid.', 'Treasury shares (3.0) (8.2) (12.3) (3.0) (8.2) (12.3)Capital reserve 21.7 – – – – –Fair value reserve (5.9) 18.1 12.5 (5.9) 18.1 12.5Goodwill written off (276.3) (276.3) (276.3) – – –Share-based payments reserve 8.7 13.0 14.1 8.7 13.0 14.1Hedging reserve (0.2) (10.1) 4.4 – – –Translation reserve 1.3 1.4 1.3 – – –Retained profits 282.2 364.0 388.6 2,118.0 2,001.9 2,026.2', '28.5 101.9 132.3 2,117.8 2,024.8 2,040.5 Treasury shares Treasury shares comprise the cost of the Company’s shares held by the Company.  1,634,770 treasury shares were transferred to share-based payments reserve during the year (2017: 1,306,589).  Capital reserve The capital reserve comprises:•  acquisitions and disposals with non-controlling interests that do not result in a change in control; and•  present value of a put liability in relation to put options entered into with the non-controlling shareholders on their equity interests in a subsidiary.  Subsequent changes in the carrying value of the put liability are also recognised within capital reserve. Fair value reserve The fair value reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of equity investments designated at FVOCI (2017: available-for-sale financial assets). Goodwill written off The goodwill written off represents the excess of consideration paid on the acquisition of subsidiaries prior to 1 January 2001 over the', 'Group’s share of the fair value of net assets acquired. Share-based payments reserve The share-based payments reserve comprises the cumulative value of services received from employees and directors recorded in respect of the grant of share options and share awards. Hedging reserve The hedging reserve comprises the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments related to hedged transactions. Translation reserve The translation reserve comprises all foreign currency translation differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of foreign operations.', 'Mobile revenue 191.9 64.0 0.1 – – 256.0Pay TV revenue 50.6 21.4 – – –   72.0Broadband revenue 79.6 27.2 – – – 106.8Enterprise Fixed revenue 178.7 67.6 22.4 6.8 19.7 295.2Total 500.8 180.2 22.5 6.8 19.7 730.0 Variable consideration that is constrained and therefore not included in the transaction price, is excluded in the amount presented above. The Group applies the practical expedient in paragraph 121 of SFRS(I) 15 and does not disclose information about its remaining performance obligations if the performance obligations is part of a contract that has an original expected duration of one year or less. In addition, amounts that are not contractually committed are excluded.', '23.2.2 Share-based Payments StarHub Performance Share Plans Under the StarHub PSP 2004 and the StarHub PSP 2014 (collectively the “StarHub Performance Share Plans”), conditional awards of shares are granted.  Awards represent the right of a participant to receive fully paid shares, their equivalent cash value or combinations thereof, free of charge, upon the participant achieving prescribed performance targets set based on medium-term corporate objectives.', 'Awards are released once the Company’s Executive Resource and Compensation Committee is satisfied that the prescribed performance targets have been achieved. There are no vesting periods beyond the performance achievement periods. The movements of the number of shares under the StarHub Performance Share Plans, the fair values of the grant at measurement date and the assumptions of the fair value model for the grants of the Company are as follows:', '31 December Company ’000 ’000 ’000 ’000 2018 Date of grant16 March 2015 516 – (516) – 22 March 2016 594 – (108) 486 6 April 2017 1,135 – (408) 727 28 March 2018 – 498 (27) 471 Total 2,245 498 (1,059) 1,684 2017 Date of grant10 March 2014 570 – (570) –16 March 2015 535 – (19) 516 22 March 2016 656 – (62) 594 6 April 2017 – 1,216 (81) 1,135 Total 1,761 1,216 (732) 2,245 The fair value of the shares is estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation methodology at the measurement dates, which are grant dates of the share awards. The assumptions under the model used for the grant in 2018 and 2017 are as follows:', '23.2.2 Share-based Payments (continued) StarHub Restricted Stock Plans Under the StarHub RSP 2004 and StarHub RSP Plan 2014 (collectively the “StarHub Restricted Stock Plans”), awards granted vest only after the satisfactory completion of time-based service conditions (time-based restricted awards) or where the award is performance-related after a further period of service beyond the performance targets completion date (performance-based restricted awards). During the year, conditional grants of 2,373,200 (2017: 3,497,690) shares under the StarHub Restricted Stock Plans were made to non-executive directors and key employees of the Group. These represent the number of shares to be delivered when performance targets at “on-target” level are achieved, or as the case may be when the time-based service conditions are completed. During the year, 204,400 (2017: 178,900) shares under the StarHub Restricted Stock Plans were vested and delivered to certain non-executive directors of the Company as part of their non-executive directors’ remuneration, without any performance or vesting conditions attached.  The movements of the number of shares under the StarHub Restricted Stock Plans, the fair values of the grant at measurement date and the assumptions of the fair value model for the grants of the Company are as follows:', '201822 March 2016 2,095 – – (117) (1,978) – 20 May 2016 27 – – – (27) –  15 March 2017 282 – (272) (10) – – 6 April 2017 2,614 – (1,159) (200) – 1,25528 March 2018 – 2,050 – (211) – 1,8398 June 2018 – 204 (204) – –        –7 September 2018 – 119 – –               – 119Total 5,018 2,373 (1,635) (538) (2,005) 3,213', 'December’000 201710 March 2014 713 – (695) (18) – –16 March 2015 2,106 – – (104) (2,002) – 8 July 2015 16 – (16) – – – 22 March 2016 2,380 – – (285) – 2,095 20 May 2016 147 – (120) – – 2715 March 2017 – 593 (296) (15) – 282 6 April 2017 – 2,717 – (103) – 2,614 29 May 2017 – 188 (179) (9) – – Total 5,362 3,498 (1,306) (534) (2,002) 5,018 The fair value of the share awards is estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation methodology at the measurement dates, which are grant dates of the share awards.  The assumptions under the model used for the grant in 2018 and 2017 are as follows:', 'Income tax using Singapore tax rate of 17% 41.7 56.7Income not subject to tax (0.6) (0.1)Non-deductible expenses 4.8 4.2Over provision in prior year, net (1.3) (1.0)Others 0.3 –Total income tax in the income statement 44.9 59.8 Income tax recognised in other comprehensive income for the years ended 31 December are as follows:', '28 Earnings Per Share (EPS) Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding (excluding treasury shares) during the year. Diluted EPS is determined by adjusting the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders and the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding (excluding treasury shares), for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares, which comprise share options granted to employees under the StarHub share plans.', '30 Related Party Transactions The Company has entered into contractual agreements on behalf of its subsidiaries, and recharges its subsidiaries based on terms agreed between the parties involved. In the normal course of business, the Group purchases and sells info-communications services to related companies. The related party transactions are carried out on terms negotiated between the parties which are intended to reflect competitive terms. Other than disclosed above and elsewhere in the financial statements, significant transactions of the Group with related parties during the financial year were as follows:', '32 Segment Reporting Segment information is presented based on the information reviewed by the chief operating decision makers (“CODM”) for performance assessment and resource allocation. The CODM assesses the Group’s financial performance using performance indicators which include revenue, EBITDA, capital expenditure and cash flow of the Group. The Group operates primarily in Singapore in three segments, namely the telecommunications, cyber security and high security assurance product segments. Overseas operations to the Group are not significant.  The Group delivers its Mobile, Pay TV, Broadband,', 'Enterprise Fixed services and equipment sales (“Telecommunications”) on a fully integrated network, and has a centralised customer service, sales, marketing and administration support. The other segments that the Group operates in is the Cyber Security and high security assurance product segment. In 2017, the Group operated only in the telecommunication segment. The Group has a large and diversified customer base consisting of individuals and corporations. There was no single customer that contributed to 10% or more of the Group’s revenue. The Group’s reportable segment information is as follows:', 'EBITDA 566.8 0.5 – 567.3 642.8Depreciation and amortisation (287.9) (3.3) – (291.2) (280.4)Finance income 3.2 – – 3.2 3.7Finance expense (30.2) – – (30.2) (29.9)Non-operating loss – – – – (0.7)Impairment loss on property, plant and equipment (2.6) – – (2.6) –Share of loss of associate (net of tax) (1.0) – – (1.0) (2.2)Profit before taxation 248.3 (2.8) – 245.5 333.3Taxation (44.5) (0.4) – (44.9) (59.8)Profit for the year 203.8 (3.2) – 200.6 273.5', '33 Acquisition of Subsidiaries and Non-Controlling Interests(i) D’Crypt Pte Ltd (“DPL”) On 24 January 2018, the Company completed the acquisition of 65% of DPL, a privately-owned company based in Singapore, for a consideration of $57.5 million. DPL is in the business of designing and developing high security assurance products and technology in telecommunication systems, equipment and related products. The acquisition of DPL will enable the Group to improve its capabilities in areas such as cryptographic and digital security, secure info-communication technologies and Internet of Things.   The Company has entered into a put and call option agreement with the existing shareholders of DPL (i.e. non-controlling shareholders upon the Group’s acquisition of 65% in DPL) to allow the Company to acquire the remaining 35% equity interest in DPL from them in future based on an agreed formula set out in the agreement.  Since the acquisition date to 31 December 2018, DPL contributed revenue of $25.3 million and profit of $2.5 million to the Group’s results. If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2018, management estimated that there would not be any significant difference to the Group’s consolidated revenue and profit for the year.', 'Total purchase consideration 57.5Less: Cash and cash equivalents in subsidiary acquired (0.9)Net cash outflow on acquisition 56.6 Acquisition-related costs  The Group incurred acquisition-related costs of $0.2 million on legal fees and due diligence costs. These costs have been included in other expenses.  Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed The following table summarises the recognised amounts of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition:', 'Property, plant and equipment 4 4.6Intangible assets 5 38.8Net current assets (excluding cash and cash equivalents) 12.6Cash and cash equivalents 0.9Provision for taxation (1.6)Borrowings (1.0)Deferred tax liabilities (5.6)Total identifiable net assets 48.7 Measurement of fair values The valuation techniques used for measuring the fair value of material assets acquired were as follows:', 'Total consideration transferred 57.5NCI, based on their proportionate interest in the recognised amounts of the assets and liabilities of the acquiree 17.0Fair value of identifiable net assets (48.7)Goodwill 25.8 The goodwill is attributable mainly to the skills and technical talent of DPL’s work force, and the synergies expected to be achieved from integrating the company into the Group’s existing cyber security capabilities. None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.(ii) Ensign InfoSecurity Pte. Ltd. (“Ensign”) On 5 September 2018, the Company announced that it had with Leone incorporated Ensign to jointly undertake a cyber security business with end-to-end capabilities. In connection with the above transaction, Leone contributed Ensign InfoSecurity (Cybersecurity) Pte. Ltd. (formerly known as Quann', 'Ensign in exchange for cash and equity shares in Ensign. The Group’s shareholding in Ensign is 40% from the transaction.  Leone has assigned rights, benefits and interests in 20% equity interest in Ensign to the Company for cash consideration of $52 million, resulting in the Group’s effective interest in Ensign to increase to 60%.  Arising from the above, the Group has effectively disposed 40% of its cyber security business and EIS, and acquired 60% interest in EIC', 'Group. The transaction was completed on 4 October 2018. Since the completion date of 4 October 2018 to 31 December 2018, Ensign and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Ensign Group”) contributed revenue of $33.3 million and losses of $3.4 million to the Group’s results. If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2018, management estimated that the Group’s consolidated revenue would have increased by $82.9 million, and consolidated profit for the year decreased by $13.9 million.  In determining these amounts, management assumed that the fair value adjustments, determined provisionally, that arose on the date of acquisition would have been the same if the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2018.', '33 Acquisition of Subsidiaries and Non-Controlling Interests (continued)(ii) Ensign InfoSecurity Pte. Ltd. (“Ensign”) (continued) Acquisition of non-controlling interests in EIS Immediately prior to the sale of EIS to Ensign, the Group acquired the remaining 19.6% interest in EIS for a cash consideration of $9.8 million, resulting in EIS becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Group.  The carrying amount of EIS’s net assets in the Group’s consolidated financial statements on the date of acquisition was $26.7 million.', 'Carrying amount of NCI acquired ($26.7 million x 19.6%) 5.2Consideration paid to NCI (9.8)Decrease in equity attributable to owners of the Company (4.6) The decrease in equity attributable to owners of the Company comprised a decrease in capital reserves of $4.6 million.  Consideration transferred to acquire 60% interest in Ensign Group The following table summarises the acquisition date fair value of each major class of consideration transferred:', '33 Acquisition of Subsidiaries and Non-Controlling Interests (continued)(ii) Ensign InfoSecurity Pte. Ltd. (“Ensign”) (continued) Acquisition-related costs  The Group incurred acquisition-related costs of $0.9 million on legal fees and due diligence costs.  These costs have been included in other expenses.  Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed of EIC Group The following table summarises the recognised provisional amounts of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition:', 'Property, plant and equipment 4 13.4Intangible assets 5 15.3Deferred tax assets 1.5Cash and cash equivalents 37.0Net current liabilities (excluding cash and cash equivalents) (38.4)Provision for taxation (1.6)Deferred tax liabilities (4.0)Total identifiable net assets 23.2 Fair values measured on a provisional basis Management is still carrying out the purchase price allocation exercise at the date of this report.  The fair value of intangible assets (customer contracts and relationships) has been determined provisionally pending completion of an independent valuation. If new information obtained within one year from the date of acquisition about facts and circumstances that existed at the date of acquisition identifies adjustments to the above amounts, or any additional provisions that existed at the date of acquisition, then the accounting for the acquisition will be revised. Measurement of fair values The valuation techniques used for measuring the fair value of material assets acquired were as follows:', 'Total consideration transferred 73.4Provisional fair value of identifiable net assets (23.2)Provisional goodwill 50.2 The goodwill is attributable mainly to the skills and technical talent of EIC Group work force, and the synergies expected to be achieved from integrating both companies’ existing cyber security capabilities. None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.(iii) Ensign InfoSecurity (Systems) Pte. Ltd. (“EIS”)  In the prior year, the Group acquired 80.4% interest in EIS. Consideration transferred  The following table summarises the acquisition date fair value of each major class of consideration transferred:', 'Contingent consideration An additional contingent consideration not exceeding $4.7 million was agreed to be paid to the non-controlling shareholders of EIS if the acquiree’s cumulative net profit before tax for financial years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2018 exceeded an agreed performance target.  This amount was fully paid in 2018 (see Note 9.2).', 'Property, plant and equipment 4 1.8Intangible assets 5 10.0Net current assets (excluding cash and cash equivalents) 3.0Cash and cash equivalents 7.7Provision for taxation (0.9)Deferred tax liabilities (2.0)Total identifiable net assets 19.6 Measurement of fair values The valuation techniques used for measuring the fair value of material assets acquired were as follows:', '34 Financial Risk Management Overview Exposure to credit, liquidity, interest risk, foreign exchange and market risks arises in the normal course of the Group’s business.   This note presents information about the Group’s exposure to each of the above risks, the Group’s objectives, policies and processes for measuring and managing risk.  Risk management framework The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Group’s risk management framework.', 'The Board has established the Risk Committee, who in turn is assisted by the Management Risk Committee, which is responsible for developing and monitoring the Group’s risk management policies. The Management Risk Committee reports to the Risk Committee on a regular basis. The Risk Committee reports to the Board of Directors on its activities.  The Group’s risk management policies are established to identify and analyse the risks faced by the Group from both an operational and execution basis. Risk management policies and systems are reviewed regularly to reflect changes in market conditions and the Group’s activities.  The Group, through its training and management standards and procedures, aims to promote a culture of risk management which entails awareness, accountability and ownership in all employees.  Derivative financial instruments are used to reduce exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, where appropriate. While these are subject to the risk of market rates changing subsequent to acquisition, such changes are generally offset by opposite effects on the items being hedged. The Group’s accounting policy in relation to derivative financial instruments is set out in Note 3.6(iii). Credit risk  Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations and arises principally from the Group’s receivables from customers. Management has a credit policy in place and the exposure to credit risk is monitored on an ongoing basis. Periodic frequent credit review and counterparty credit limits are practised. The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk from trade receivables due to its large diversified customer base.  Credit evaluations are performed on corporate customers requiring credit. Identification documents are obtained from retail customers.', 'Deposits are obtained for certain categories of higher risk customers. Counterparty risk arising from cash and cash equivalents and treasury transactions is managed by dealing mainly with high credit quality counterparties, which have a minimum rating of A/A1 based on Standard & Poor or Moody’s ratings.   The maximum credit risk exposure is represented by the carrying value of each financial asset in the statement of financial position less collaterals held.  Collaterals in the form of cash or bank guarantees are obtained from counterparties where appropriate.', '34 Financial Risk Management (continued) Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting the obligations associated with its financial liabilities that are settled by delivering cash or another financial asset. The Group actively monitors its liquidity risk and manages its operating cash flows, debt maturity profile and availability of funding. The', 'Group maintains sufficient level of cash and cash equivalents, expects to generate sufficient cash flows from its operation, and has available funding through diverse sources of committed and uncommitted credit facilities from banks and the capital market through its multicurrency debt issuance programme to ensure that there are adequate credit facilities which may be utilised when the need arises to meet its working capital requirements.  At the end of the reporting period, assets held by the Group and the Company for managing liquidity risk include cash and short-term deposits, as well as available credit from its multicurrency debt issuance programme. In addition, the Group also reviews compliance with loan covenants. The following are the remaining contractual undiscounted cash outflows (including interest payments) of financial liabilities:', 'Derivative financial liabilitiesForward exchange contracts used for hedging (gross-settled) (12.2) - Outflow (351.8) (283.7) (68.1) – - Inflow 339.6 273.3 66.3 –(12.2) (12.2) (10.4) (1.8) –^  The carrying amount of trade and other payables disclosed in the table excludes deferred income, forward exchange contracts, put and call options, net GST payable and employee benefits. The maturity analysis shows the contractual undiscounted cash flows of the Group and the Company’s derivative financial instruments on the basis of their earliest possible contractual maturity. The cash inflows/(outflows) disclosed relate to those instruments held for risk management purposes and which are usually not closed out prior to contractual maturity.   It is not expected that the cash flows included in the maturity analysis above could occur significantly earlier, or at significantly different amounts.  Market risk Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices, such as interest rates, foreign exchange rates and equity prices will affect the Group’s income or the value of its holdings of financial instruments. The objective of market risk management is to manage and control market risk exposures within acceptable parameters, while optimising the return. The Group buys and sells derivatives, and also incurs financial liabilities, in order to manage market risks. Generally, the Group seeks to apply hedge accounting in order to management volatility in profit or loss.', '34 Financial Risk Management (continued) Market risk (continued) Interest rate risk  The Group’s exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to the Group’s debt obligations. The Group adopts a policy of ensuring that at least 50 percent of its exposure to changes in interest rates on bank loans is on a fixed rate basis. Sensitivity analysis The Group’s and the Company’s borrowings are denominated in Singapore dollars. An increase/decrease in the floating interest rates by', '100 basis points, with all other variables remaining constant, does not have a material impact on the Group’s and the Company’s profit before taxation. Foreign currency risk The Group is exposed to transactional foreign currency risk to the extent that there is a mismatch between the currencies in which sales, purchases, receivables and borrowings, that are denominated in a currency other than the respective functional currencies of the Group entities. The functional currency of the Group entities is the Singapore Dollar. The currency giving rise to this risk is primarily the United States Dollar. The Group’s and the Company’s exposures to United States Dollar are as follows:', '9.6 (27.9) 18.4 (13.4) For operations with significant expenditure denominated in foreign currencies, forward exchange contracts are entered into to hedge the foreign currency risk exposure on committed payment obligations. At 31 December 2018, the Group and the Company have outstanding forward exchange contracts with notional principal amounts of approximately $95.5 million (2017: $351.8 million). Certain forward exchange contracts are entered into by the Company on behalf of a subsidiary.  In respect of other monetary liabilities held in foreign currencies, the Group ensures that the net exposure is kept to an acceptable level by buying foreign currencies at spot rates where necessary to address any shortfalls.', 'Group’s and Company’s results. Other market price risk  The Group has investments in quoted equity shares. The market value of these investments will fluctuate with market conditions. Sensitivity analysis The Group and Company had assessed that a reasonable change in the share price would not result in a material impact on the Group’s and Company’s equity. Hedge accounting Cash flow hedges The Group held the following instruments to hedge exposures to changes in foreign currency.', 'In general, under such agreements the amounts owed by each counterparty on a single day in respect of all transactions outstanding in the same currency are aggregated into a single net amount that is payable by one party to the other. In certain circumstances – e.g. when a credit event such as a default occurs, all outstanding transactions under the agreement are terminated, the termination value is assessed and only a single net amount is payable in settlement of all transactions. The above ISDA agreements do not meet the criteria for offsetting in the statement of financial position. This is because they create a right of set-off of recognised amounts that is enforceable only following an event of default, insolvency or bankruptcy of the Group or the counterparties. In addition, the Group and its counterparties do not intend to settle on a net basis or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. The Group enters into forward exchange contracts to hedge the foreign currency risk on committed payment obligations.', 'Fair value hedging instrumentsForward exchange contracts used for hedging (derivative asset) 0.1 – 0.1 –Forward exchange contracts used for hedging (derivative liability) (0.3) (12.2) (0.3) (12.2)(0.2) (12.2) (0.2) (12.2)#     The carrying amount of other receivables disclosed in the table excludes prepayments and marked-to-market financial instruments.^  The carrying amount of trade and other payables disclosed in the table excludes deferred income, forward exchange contracts, put liability to acquire non-controlling interests, put and call options, net GST payable and employee benefits. Estimation of fair values The following summarises the significant methods and assumptions used in estimating the fair values of financial instruments of the', 'Group and Company: Derivatives Marked-to-market valuations of the forward exchange contracts are provided by the banks.  Those quotes are tested using pricing models or discounted cash flow techniques. Where discounted cash flow techniques are used, estimated future cash flows are based on management’s best estimates and the discount rate is a market related rate for a similar instrument at the reporting date.  Where other pricing models are used, inputs are based on market related data at the reporting date. Borrowings  The fair values of borrowings which reprice within one year of reporting date were assumed to equate the carrying value.  All other borrowings are calculated using discounted cash flow models based on the present value of future principal and interest cash flows, discounted at the market rate at the reporting date.', '34 Financial Risk Management (continued) Estimation of fair values (continued) Amounts due from related parties (non-current) Non-current amounts due from related parties approximates their fair values which are calculated using discounted cash flow model based on the present value of future principal and interest cash flows, discounted at the market rate at the reporting date. Equity investments at FVOCI and available-for-sale quoted equity investments The carrying amounts of equity investments at FVOCI and available-for-sale quoted equity investments approximates its fair value. Other financial assets and liabilities The carrying amounts of financial assets and liabilities with maturity of less than one year (including trade and other receivables, cash and cash equivalents, and trade and other payables) are assumed to approximate their fair values. Fair value hierarchy The table below analyses financial instruments carried at fair value, by valuation method.  The different levels have been defined as follows: Level 1:  quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level 2:  inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly (i.e. as   prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from prices). Level 3: inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data (unobservable inputs). The following table represents the assets and liabilities measured at fair value, using the above valuation methods, at reporting date:', 'Balance at beginning of the year – –Arising from business combination 42.7 13.9Fair value change recognised in income statement – (6.9)Fair value change recognised in capital reserve (9.7) –Balance at end of the year 33.0 7.0 The fair value of the put liability is estimated based on the present value of expected payments, and the fair value of the put and call options are valued based on the Black Scholes model.', '35 Capital Management The Group regularly reviews its financial position, capital structure and use of capital, with the objective of achieving long-term capital efficiency, optimum shareholders’ total returns, including the level of dividends, and appropriate strategic positioning. From time to time, the Group may purchase its own shares on the market; the timing of these purchases depends on market prices. Such share purchases are intended to be used for issuing shares under the StarHub Performance Share Plan and StarHub Restricted Stock', '744.9 895.4 93.1 160.4 As at 31 December 2018, the Group has outstanding capital and other financial commitments with related companies amounting to $11.7 million (2017: $18.5 million), which has been included above.  Included in the capital expenditures contracted by the Company is an amount of approximately $0.2 million (2017: $0.3 million) which has been entered into on behalf of certain of its subsidiaries.(b) Operating leases Future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases are as follows:', '351.5 418.5 286.2 346.2 As at 31 December 2018, the Group has outstanding operating lease commitments with related companies amounting to $229.0 million (2017: $305.6 million), which have been included above. Included in the operating lease commitments of the Company is $9.3 million (2017: $10.0 million) which was contracted on behalf of a subsidiary. The operating leases include lease of premises and network infrastructure. The leases have varying terms and renewal rights.', '37 Subsequent Events Dividend declaration The directors have proposed a final dividend of $0.04 (2017: $0.04) per share, tax exempt (one tier), totalling $69.2 million (2017: $69.2 million) in respect of the financial year ended 31 December 2018.  This proposed final tax exempt dividend has not been recognised as at year end and will be submitted for shareholders’ approval at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting of the Company in 2019.', 'International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) at 31 December 2017 that are applicable for annual period beginning on 1 January 2018. As stated in Note 2.1, these are the first financial statements of the Group and of the Company prepared in accordance with SFRS(I). The accounting policies set out in Note 3 have been applied in preparing the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2018, the comparative information presented in these financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 and in the preparation of the opening SFRS(I) statement of financial position at 1 January 2017 (the Group’s date of transition), subject to the mandatory exceptions and optional exemptions under SFRS(I) 1. In preparing the opening SFRS(I) statement of financial position, the Group has adjusted amounts reported previously in the financial statements prepared in accordance with previous FRS. In addition to the adoption of the new framework, the Group also concurrently applied the following SFRS(I)s, interpretations of SFRS(I)s and requirements of SFRS(I)s which are mandatorily effective from the same date.• SFRS(I) 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers which includes clarifications to IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers issued by the IASB in April 2016;• SFRS(I) 9 Financial Instruments which includes amendments arising from IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts issued by the IASB in', 'September 2016;• requirements in SFRS(I) 2 Share-based Payment arising from the amendments to IFRS 2 – Classification and measurement of share-based payment transactions issued by the IASB in June 2016;• requirements in SFRS(I) 1-40 Investment Property arising from the amendments to IAS 40 – Transfers of investment property issued by the IASB in December 2016;• requirements in SFRS(I) 1 arising from the amendments to IFRS(I) – Deletion of short-term exemptions for first-time adopters issued by the IASB in December 2016;• requirements in SFRS(I) 1-28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures arising from the amendments to IAS 28 – Measuring an associate or joint venture at fair value issued by the IASB in December 2016; and• SFRS(I) INT 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration. The application of the above standards and interpretations do not have material effect on the financial statements, except for SFRS(I) 15. An explanation of how the transition from previous FRS to SFRS(I) and the adoption of SFRS(I) 15 have affected the Company’s financial position, financial performance and cash flows is set out under the summary of quantitative impact and the accompanying notes. Summary of quantitative impact The following reconciliations summarise the impacts on initial application of SFRS(I) 1 and SFRS(I) 15 on the Group’s and the Company’s financial positions as at 1 January 2017, 31 December 2017 and 1 January 2018 and the Group’s income statement and other comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017.  There were no material adjustments to the Group’s consolidated cash flow statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 arising on the transition to SFRS(I).', 'Current assetsInventories 11 71.9 – 71.9 71.9Contract assets 10 – 285.0 285.0 285.0Contract costs 10 – 18.3 18.3 18.3Trade receivables 12 201.5 – 201.5 201.5Other receivables, deposits and prepayments 13 183.5 (96.1) 87.4 87.4Amounts due from related parties 9 30.6 (5.7) 24.9 24.9Cash and cash equivalents 14 345.2 – 345.2 345.2', 'Profit attributable to:Owners of the Company 249.0 23.9 272.9Non-controlling interests 0.6 – 0.6Profit for the year 249.6 23.9 273.5*  Under the transition methods chosen, comparative information has not been restated except for separately presenting loss allowances on trade receivables and contract assets to conform to SFRS(I) presentation requirements for the purpose of this note.', 'Change in fair value of available-for-sale financial assets, net of taxation 5.6 – 5.6Foreign currency translation differences 0.1 – 0.1Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges, net of taxation (14.5) – (14.5)Other comprehensive loss for the year, net of taxation (8.8) – (8.8)Total comprehensive income for the year 240.8 23.9 264.7', 'Non-current assetsProperty, plant and equipment 4 425.2 – – 425.2Intangible assets 5 92.3 – – 92.3Subsidiaries 6 2,507.8 604.3 – 3,112.1Associate 7 27.8 – – 27.8Other investments 8 60.0 – – 60.0Amounts due from related parties 9 7.9 – – 7.9Contract assets 10 – – 1.0 1.0Contract costs 10 – – 0.4 0.4', 'Current assetsInventories 11 0.7 – – 0.7Contract assets 10 – – 18.4 18.4Contract costs 10 – – 1.6 1.6Trade receivables 12 167.7 – – 167.7Other receivables, deposits and prepayments 13 47.2 – (16.4) 30.8Amounts due from related parties 9 24.8 – (3.2) 21.6Cash and cash equivalents 14 321.1 – – 321.1', 'Current assetsInventories 11 0.7 – – 0.7Contract assets 10 – – 12.0 12.0Contract costs 10 – – 2.1 2.1Trade receivables 12 141.7 – – 141.7Other receivables, deposits and prepayments 13 43.6 – (8.0) 35.6Amounts due from related parties 9 19.4 – (0.2) 19.2Cash and cash equivalents 14 236.0 – – 236.0', 'SFRS(I) 1 generally requires that the Group applies SFRS(I) that are effective as at 31 December 2018 on a retrospective basis, as if such accounting policy had always been applied, subject to the mandatory exceptions and optional exemptions in SFRS(I) 1. Other than as disclosed below, the application of the mandatory exceptions and the optional exemptions in SFRS(I) 1 did not have any significant impact on the financial statements.(i) Fair value as deemed cost for investments in subsidiaries at the Company level The Group elected the optional exemption in SFRS(I) 1 to measure the cost of investments in certain subsidiaries held by the Company at the date of transition to SFRS(I) at fair value and used that fair value as its deemed cost in its SFRS(I) financial statements. The Group, through its “Hubbing” strategy, operates and delivers its Mobile, Pay TV, Broadband and Enterprise Fixed services on an operationally integrated network, customer service, sales, marketing and administration support.  However, due to passage of time, the cost of investment in the subsidiaries held by the Company was not reflective of the real business value of the respective subsidiaries.  As such, the Group considered that the election of fair value at the date of transition as its deemed cost would result in more relevant financial information. The fair value of certain subsidiaries was determined by the income approach. As such, the carrying amount of cost of investment in subsidiaries and retained profits of the Company increased by $604.3 million as at 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2017.  (ii) Merger/capital reserve The Company elected to transfer the merger/capital reserve arising from the acquisition of StarHub Cable Vision Ltd (“SCV”) in 2002 to retained profits. As such, retained profits of the Company increased by $276.5 million with a corresponding decrease in merger/capital reserve.', 'B. SFRS(I) 15 SFRS(I) 15 establishes a comprehensive framework for determining whether, how much and when revenue is recognised. It also introduces new cost guidance which requires certain costs of obtaining and fulfilling contracts to be recognised as separate assets when specified criteria are met. The Group adopted SFRS(I) 15 in its financial statements using the retrospective approach. All requirements of SFRS(I) 15 have been applied retrospectively, except for the application of the practical expedients as described below, and the information presented for 2017 has been restated. The Group has applied the following practical expedients as allowed under SFRS(I) 1.• Completed contracts that began and ended in the same annual reporting period in 2017 and contracts completed at 1 January', '1 January 2017 when identifying the satisfied and unsatisfied performance obligations, determining the transaction price, and allocating the transaction price to the satisfied and unsatisfied performance obligations.  • For the year ended 31 December 2017, the Group did not disclose the amount of the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations and an explanation of when the Group expects to recognise that amount as revenue.', 'B. SFRS(I) 15 (continued) The impact upon the adoption of SFRS(I) 15 are described below. (i) Bundled products and services Under SFRS(I) 15, revenue will be allocated to the individual elements within bundled products and services based on their relative SSP at contract inception.(ii) Variable consideration Certain contracts with customers include variable considerations like right of return, trade discounts or volume rebates. Currently, the', 'Group recognises revenue from the sale of goods measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable, net of returns and allowance, trade discounts and volume rebates. If revenue cannot be reliably measured, the Group defers revenue recognition until the uncertainty is resolved. Under SFRS(I) 15, such provisions will be estimated at contract inception and every reporting period and adjusted against revenue.(iii) Material right Under SFRS(I) 15, options to acquire additional goods or services represent separate performance obligations if they provide the customer a material right that the customer would not otherwise receive. In these cases, revenue from the contract is deferred and recognised when future goods and services are transferred or when the option expires. The transaction price is allocated to performance obligations (including the option) based on relative SSP.  (iv) Contract modification Changes in scope or price (or both) of a contract that is approved by parties to the contract are contract modifications. SFRS(I) 15 prescribes the treatments of contract modifications depending on the attributes of the modification and the remaining goods and/or services.  (v) Contract cost SFRS(I) 15 requires the incremental costs of obtaining a contract to be recognised as an asset if the entity expects to recover those costs. Those incremental costs are limited to the costs that the entity would not have incurred if the contract had not been successfully obtained. A practical expedient is available, allowing the incremental costs of obtaining a contract to be expensed if the associated amortisation period would be 12 months or less. Presentation of contract assets and liabilities  On adopting SFRS(I) 15, the Group has also changed the presentation of the following amounts: (a) ‘Managed services contract in progress’ classified as ‘Other receivables’ of $7.7 million as at 31 December 2017 and $Nil as at 1', 'January 2017 were reclassified to ‘Contract assets’.(b) ‘Customer loyalty credits’ and ‘Customer advances’ classified as ‘Unearned revenue’ of $133.9 million as at 31 December 2017 and $152.5 million as at 1 January 2017 were reclassified to ‘Contract Assets’ and ‘Contract Liabilities’.(c) ‘Unbilled revenue’ classified as ‘other receivables’ of $88.4 million as at 31 December 2017 and $115.4 million as at 1 January', 'C. SFRS(I) 9 SFRS(I) 9 Financial Instruments sets out requirements for recognising and measuring financial assets, financial liabilities and some contracts to buy or sell non-financial items. It also introduces a new ECL model and a new general hedge accounting model. The Group adopted SFRS(I) 9 from 1 January 2018.  In accordance with the exemption in SFRS(I) 1, the Group elected not to restate information for 2017. Accordingly, the information presented for 2017 is presented, as previously reported, under FRS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement.', 'Differences in the carrying amounts of financial assets and financial liabilities resulting from the adoption of SFRS(I) 9 are recognised in retained earnings and reserves as at 1 January 2018. Arising from this election, the Group is exempted from providing disclosures required by SFRS(I) 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosures for the comparative period to the extent that these disclosures relate to items within the scope of SFRS(I) 9. Instead, disclosures under FRS', '107 Financial Instruments: Disclosures relating to items within the scope of FRS 39 are provided for the comparative period. Changes in accounting policies resulting from the adoption of SFRS(I) 9 have been generally applied by the Group retrospectively, except as described below.• The following assessments were made on the basis of facts and circumstances that existed at 1 January 2018: - The determination of the business model within which a financial asset is held; - The determination of whether the contractual terms of a financial asset give rise to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest of the principal amount outstanding; and - The designation of an equity investment that is not held-for-trading as FVOCI.• New hedge accounting requirements are applied prospectively.  All hedging relationships designated under FRS 39 at 31', 'December 2017 met the criteria for hedging accounting under SFRS(I) 9 at 1 January 2018 and therefore were regarded as continuing hedging relationships. The impact upon adoption of SFRS(I) 9, including the corresponding tax effects, are described below.(i) Classification of financial assets and financial liabilities Under SFRS(I) 9, financial assets are classified in the following categories: measured at amortised cost, FVOCI – equity instrument or', 'FVTPL.  The classification of financial assets under SFRS(I) 9 is generally based on the business model in which a financial asset is managed and its contractual cash flow characteristics.  SFRS(I) 9 eliminates the previous FRS 39 categories of loans and receivables and available-for-sale.  For an explanation of how the Group classifies and measures financial assets and related gains and losses under SFRS(I) 9, see Note 3.6. The adoption of SFRS(I) 9 has not had a significant effect on the Group’s accounting policies for financial liabilities.', 'Trade receivables (b) Loans and receivables Amortised cost 167.7 167.7Other receivables (b) Loans and receivables Amortised cost 5.4 5.4Amounts due from related parties (b) Loans and receivables Amortised cost 29.5 29.5Cash and cash equivalents (b) Loans and receivables Amortised cost 321.1 321.1Total financial assets 583.7 583.7(a) These equity investments represent investments that the Group and the Company intend to hold for the long term for strategic purposes. The Group and the Company have designated these investments at 1 January 2018 as measured at FVOCI.  Unlike FRS', '39, the accumulated fair value reserve related to remeasurement of these investments will never be reclassified to profit or loss.(b) Trade and other receivables, amounts due from related parties and cash and cash equivalents that were classified as loans and receivables under FRS 39 are now classified at amortised cost. There were no adjustments on transition to SFRS(I) 9 as the impact was not material.', 'January 2019 and earlier applications is permitted; however, the Company has not early adopted the new or amended standards and interpretations in preparing these financial statements. The following new SFRS(I)s, interpretations and amendments to SFRS(I)s are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019: Applicable to 2019 financial statements• SFRS(I) 16 Leases• SFRS(I) INT 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments• Long-term Interests in Associates and Joint Ventures (Amendments to SFRS(I) 1-28)• Prepayment Features with Negative Compensation (Amendments to SFRS(I) 9)• Previously Held Interest in a Joint Operation (Amendments to SFRS(I) 3 and 11)• Income Tax Consequences of Payments on Financial Instruments Classified as Equity (Amendments to SFRS(I) 1-12)• Borrowing Costs Eligible for Capitalisation (Amendments to SFRS(I)1-23)• Plan Amendment, Curtailment or Settlement (Amendments to SFRS(I)1-19)', '39 New standards and interpretations not yet adopted (continued) Applicable to 2021 financial statements• SFRS(I) 17 Insurance Contracts Mandatory effective date deferred• Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture (Amendments to SFRS(I) 10 and SFRS(I) 1-28). SFRS(I) 16 - Leases The Group has assessed the estimated impact that initial application of SFRS(I) 16 will have on the financial statements. The Group’s assessment of SFRS(I) 16, which is expected to have a more significant impact on the Group’s financial statements is described below. SFRS(I) 16 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019, with early adoption permitted if SFRS(I) 15 is also applied. SFRS(I) 16 eliminates the lessee’s classification of leases as either operating leases or finance leases and introduces a single lessee accounting model. Applying the new model, a lessee is required to recognise right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities for all leases with a term of more than 12 months, unless the underlying asset is of low value.  The nature of expenses related to those lease will change as SFRS(I) 16 replaces the straight-line operating lease expense with depreciation change for ROU assets and interest expense on lease liabilities. SFRS(I) 16 substantially carries forward the lessor accounting requirements in SFRS(I) 17 Leases. Accordingly, a lessor continues to classify its leases as operating leases or finance leases, and to account for these two types of leases using the FRS 17 operating lease and finance lease accounting models respectively. However, SFRS(I) 16 requires more extensive disclosures to be provided by a lessor. When effective, SFRS(I) 16 replaces existing lease accounting guidance, including SFRS(I) INT 1-17 Leases, SFRS(I) INT 4 Determining whether an Arrangement contains a Lease; SFRS(I) 15 Operating Leases-Incentives; and SFRS(I) INT 1-27 Evaluating the Substance of', 'Transactions Involving the Legal Form of a Lease. Potential impact on the financial statements The Group will adopt the standard when it becomes effective in 2019 and expects to apply the standard using the modified retrospective approach. The ROU assets recognised at the date of initial application shall comprise of lease prepayments and the present value of future lease payments at that date. The potential impact from adoption of SFRS(I) 16 are as follows: • Operating lease expense is expected to decrease;• Depreciation and finance expenses are expected to increase; and• Total assets and total liabilities are expected to increase.  Accordingly, subject to application of practical expedients, lease components of existing lease contracts that are effective on 1 January', 'Company Pte. Ltd. (AMHC), which is in turn a wholly-owned subsidiary of STT Communications Ltd, a wholly-owned subsidiary of ST Telemedia. AMHC holds approximately 75% of the total issued share capital of AMH.(3) Ooredoo Investment Holding S.P.C. (OIH) and Ooredoo Q.S.C. (Ooredoo) are deemed to have an interest in 965,845,290 shares of StarHub held by AMH.  QIH holds approximately 25% of the total issued share capital of AMH. QIH is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Ooredoo.  (4) Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation (NTT) is deemed to have an interest in 171,490,520 shares of StarHub held by NTT Communications', '2 To re-elect the following Directors who will retire pursuant to Article 99 of the Company’s Constitution and who, being eligible, will offer themselves for re-election:(a)  Ms Nayantara Bali; Resolution 2(b)  Ms Ng Shin Ein (independent Member of the Audit Committee); and Resolution 3(c)   Mr Lionel Yeo Hung Tong. Resolution 4', '7 That authority be and is hereby given to the Directors to: Resolution 10(a)  (i)       issue shares of the Company (“shares”) whether by way of rights, bonus or otherwise; and/or(ii)  make or grant offers, agreements or options (collectively, “Instruments”) that might or would require shares to be issued, including but not limited to the creation and issue of (as well as adjustments to) warrants, debentures or other instruments convertible into shares, at any time and upon such terms and conditions and for such purposes and to such persons as the Directors may in their absolute discretion deem fit; and(b)  (notwithstanding the authority conferred by this Resolution may have ceased to be in force) issue shares in pursuance of any Instrument made or granted by the Directors while this Resolution was in force,', '264provided that:(1)  the aggregate number of shares to be issued pursuant to this Resolution (including shares to be issued in pursuance of Instruments made or granted pursuant to this Resolution) does not exceed 50% of the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings) (as calculated in accordance with subparagraph (2) below), of which the aggregate number of shares to be issued other than on a pro rata basis to shareholders of the Company (including shares to be issued in pursuance of Instruments made or granted pursuant to this Resolution) does not exceed 15% of the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings) (as calculated in accordance with subparagraph (2) below);(2)  (subject to such manner of calculation as may be prescribed by the Singapore Exchange Securities Trading', 'Limited (“SGX-ST”)) for the purpose of determining the aggregate number of shares that may be issued under subparagraph (1) above, the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings) shall be based on the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings), at the time this Resolution is passed, after adjusting for:(i)  new shares arising from the conversion or exercise of any convertible securities or share options or vesting of share awards which are outstanding or subsisting at the time this Resolution is passed; and(ii)  any subsequent bonus issue, consolidation or subdivision of shares, and, in sub-paragraph (1) above and this sub-paragraph (2), “subsidiary holdings” has the meaning given to it in the Listing Manual of the SGX-ST;(3)  in exercising the authority conferred by this Resolution, the Company shall comply with the provisions of the', 'ST) and the Constitution for the time being of the Company; and(4)  (unless revoked or varied by the Company in General Meeting) the authority conferred by this Resolution shall continue in force until the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or the date by which the next Annual General Meeting of the Company is required by law to be held, whichever is the earlier.', '8 That authority be and is hereby given to the Directors to: Resolution 11(a)  offer and grant awards in accordance with the provisions of the StarHub Performance Share Plan 2014 (the “PSP 2014”) and/or the StarHub Restricted Stock Plan 2014 (the “RSP 2014”) (the PSP 2014 and the RSP 2014, together the “Share Plans”); and(b)  allot and issue from time to time such number of ordinary shares as may be required to be allotted and issued pursuant to the vesting of awards granted under the Share Plans,provided that the aggregate number of ordinary shares allotted and issued under the Share Plans shall not exceed the limits specified in the rules of the Share Plans.', '1. (a) A member who is not a relevant intermediary is entitled to appoint not more than two proxies to attend, speak and vote at the Annual General Meeting.   Where such member’s form of proxy appoints more than one proxy, the proportion of the shareholding concerned to be represented by each proxy shall   be specified in the form of proxy.  (b) A member who is a relevant intermediary is entitled to appoint more than two proxies to attend, speak and vote at the Annual General Meeting, but each   proxy must be appointed to exercise the rights attached to a different share or shares held by such member. Where such member’s form of proxy appoints   more than two proxies, the number and class of shares in relation to which each proxy has been appointed shall be specified in the form of proxy. “Relevant intermediary” has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 181 of the Companies Act, Cap. 50 of Singapore.', 'Resolution 7 is to approve the payment of an aggregate sum of S$1,610,405.00, as Directors’ remuneration for the non-executive Directors of the Company for the financial year ended 31 December 2018. It includes (a) the aggregate sum of S$148,595.00 being the Directors’ remuneration for Mr Liu Chee Ming and Ms', '5 December 2017 to its dissolution on 7 August 2018. The Board ExCo Terms of Reference provided that payment of the Board ExCo fees is to be made in arrears after the dissolution of the Board ExCo. Save for the arrears payment for the Board ExCo fees for the period from 5 December 2017 to 31 December 2017, the total', 'Directors’ remuneration for the non-executive Directors of the Company for the financial year ended 31 December 2018 takes into account the 10% voluntary fee reduction, which the non-executive Directors took to support StarHub’s strategic transformation plan. If approved, each of the non-executive Directors will receive 70% of his/her Directors’ remuneration in cash and (with the exception of Mr Naoki Wakai) 30% of his/her Directors’ remuneration in the form of a restricted share award. Mr Naoki Wakai has declined the restricted share award grant and will only receive the cash component of his remuneration. See the section on “2.', 'Directors’ remuneration. The number of shares to be awarded will be based on the volume weighted average price of a share in the Company listed on the SGX-ST over the 14 trading days commencing on the ex-dividend date that immediately follows the Annual General Meeting. The number of shares to be awarded will be rounded down to the nearest hundred, with cash to be paid in lieu of the remaining shares arising. The restricted share awards will consist of the grant of fully paid shares, without any performance or vesting conditions attached. However, in order to encourage alignment of the interests of the Directors with the interests of shareholders, non-executive Directors who received the aforesaid restricted share award are required to hold shares worth at least (a) the prevailing annual basic retainer fee, or (b) the aggregate of (i) the total number of shares awarded as part of their remuneration for the financial year ended 31 December 2011 and each subsequent financial year thereafter and (ii) 50% of the total number of shares awarded from the financial year ended 31 December 2007 to the financial year ended', 'Resolution 10 is to empower the Directors to issue shares and to make or grant instruments (such as warrants or debentures) convertible into shares, and to issue shares in pursuance of such instruments, up to a number not exceeding in total 50% of the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings), with a sub-limit of 15% for issues other than on a pro rata basis to shareholders. For the purpose of determining the aggregate number of shares that may be issued, the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings) shall be based on the total number of issued shares (excluding treasury shares and subsidiary holdings) at the time that Resolution 10 is passed, after adjusting for (a) new shares arising from the conversion or exercise of any convertible securities or share options or vesting of share awards which are outstanding or subsisting at the time that Resolution 10 is passed, and (b) any subsequent bonus issue, consolidation or subdivision of shares.', 'Resolution 11 is to empower the Directors to offer and grant awards and to allot and issue ordinary shares pursuant to the Share Plans provided that the aggregate number of ordinary shares allotted and issued under the Share Plans shall not exceed the limits specified in the rules of the Share Plans. Approval for the adoption of the Share Plans was given by shareholders at an Extraordinary General Meeting of the Company held on 14 April 2014. The grant of awards under the respective', 'Singapore 068902 up to the close of business at 5.00 p.m. on 7 May 2019 (“Entitlement Date”) will be registered to determine members’ entitlements to the final dividend.  Subject as aforesaid, persons whose securities accounts with The Central Depository (Pte) Limited are credited with ordinary shares as at 5.00 p.m. on the Entitlement Date will be entitled to the final dividend.', 'By submitting an instrument appointing a proxy(ies) and/or representative(s) to attend, speak and vote at the Annual General Meeting and/or any adjournment thereof, a member of the Company (i) consents to the collection, use and disclosure of the member’s personal data by the Company (or its agents or service providers) for the purpose of the processing, administration and analysis by the Company (or its agents or service providers) of proxies and representatives appointed for the Annual General Meeting (including any adjournment thereof) and the preparation and compilation of the attendance lists, minutes and other documents relating to the Annual General Meeting (including any adjournment thereof), and in order for the Company (or its agents or service providers) to comply with any applicable laws, listing rules, take-over rules, regulations and/or guidelines (collectively, the “Purposes”), (ii) warrants that where the member discloses the personal data of the member’s proxy(ies) and/or representative(s) to the Company (or its agents or service providers), the member has obtained the prior consent of such proxy(ies) and/or representative(s) for the collection, use and disclosure by the Company (or its agents or service providers) of the personal data of such proxy(ies) and/or representative(s) for the Purposes, and (iii) agrees that the member will indemnify the Company in respect of any penalties, liabilities, claims, demands, losses and damages as a result of the member’s breach of warranty.', 'Other Information(a)  Whether at any time during the last 10 years, an application or a petition under any bankruptcy law of any jurisdiction was filed against him or against a partnership of which he was a partner at the time when he was a partner or at any time within 2 years from the date he ceased to be a partner?', '10 years, an application or a petition under any law of any jurisdiction was filed against an entity (not being a partnership) of which he was a director or an equivalent person or a key executive, at the time when he was a director or an equivalent person or a key executive of that entity or at any time within 2 years from the date he ceased to be a director or an equivalent person or a key executive of that entity, for the winding up or dissolution of that entity or, where that entity is the trustee of a business trust, that business trust, on the ground of insolvency?', 'Other Information(a)  Whether at any time during the last 10 years, an application or a petition under any bankruptcy law of any jurisdiction was filed against him or against a partnership of which he was a partner at the time when he was a partner or at any time within 2 years from the date he ceased to be a partner?', '10 years, an application or a petition under any law of any jurisdiction was filed against an entity (not being a partnership) of which he was a director or an equivalent person or a key executive, at the time when he was a director or an equivalent person or a key executive of that entity or at any time within 2 years from the date he ceased to be a director or an equivalent person or a key executive of that entity, for the winding up or dissolution of that entity or, where that entity is the trustee of a business trust, that business trust, on the ground of insolvency?', 'Name of Director NAYANTARA BALI NG SHIN EIN LIONEL YEO HUNG TONG PAUL MA KAH WOH LIM MING SEONG(f)  Whether at any time during the last 10 years, judgment has been entered against him in any civil proceedings in Singapore or elsewhere involving a breach of any law or regulatory requirement that relates to the securities or futures industry in Singapore or elsewhere, or a finding of fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty on his part, or he has been the subject of any civil proceedings (including any pending civil proceedings of which he is aware) involving an allegation of fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty on his part?', 'Name of Director NAYANTARA BALI NG SHIN EIN LIONEL YEO HUNG TONG PAUL MA KAH WOH LIM MING SEONG(f)  Whether at any time during the last 10 years, judgment has been entered against him in any civil proceedings in Singapore or elsewhere involving a breach of any law or regulatory requirement that relates to the securities or futures industry in Singapore or elsewhere, or a finding of fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty on his part, or he has been the subject of any civil proceedings (including any pending civil proceedings of which he is aware) involving an allegation of fraud, misrepresentation or dishonesty on his part?', 'No No No No No(iv) any entity or business trust which has been investigated for a breach of any law or regulatory requirement that relates to the securities or futures industry in Singapore or elsewhere, in connection with any matter occurring or arising during that period when he was so concerned with the entity or business trust?', 'No No No No No(iv) any entity or business trust which has been investigated for a breach of any law or regulatory requirement that relates to the securities or futures industry in Singapore or elsewhere, in connection with any matter occurring or arising during that period when he was so concerned with the entity or business trust?', 'All rights reserved. Some of the information in this report constitute “forward looking statements” which reflect StarHub’s current intentions, plans, expectations, as-sumptions and beliefs about future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which may be outside StarHub’s control.  You are urged to view all forward-looking statements with caution.  No information herein should be reproduced without the express written permission of StarHub.  All information herein is correct at the time of publication.  For updated information, please contact our Corporate Office.', '2. For CPF/SRS investors who have used their CPF/SRS moneys to buy StarHub Ltd shares, this form of proxy is not valid for use and shall be ineffective for all intents and purposes if used or purported to be used by them. CPF/SRS investors should contact their respective Agent Banks/', 'Shareholdings (%)and/or (delete as appropriate)   as my/our proxy/proxies to attend, speak and vote for me/us and on my/our behalf at the Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of the Company to be held at NTUC Centre, One Marina Boulevard, Level 7, Stephen Riady Auditorium @ NTUC, Singapore 018989 on 30 April 2019 at 10.00 a.m. and at any adjournment thereof.', 'I/We direct my/our proxy/proxies to vote for or against the Resolutions to be proposed at the AGM as indicated hereunder. In the absence of specific directions, the proxy/proxies will vote or abstain as he/they may think fit, as he/they will on any other matter arising at the AGM and at any adjournment thereof.', '11 To authorise Directors to offer and grant awards and to allot and issue shares pursuant to, and subject to the limits specified in, the StarHub Performance Share Plan 2014 and/or the StarHub Restricted Stock Plan 2014* If you wish to exercise all your votes “For” or “Against” the relevant Resolution, please tick ( ) within the relevant box provided.  Alternatively, if you wish to exercise your votes both “For” and “Against” the relevant Resolution, please indicate the number of Shares in the boxes provided.* Voting will be conducted by poll.', 'Depository (Pte) Limited), you should insert that number of shares.  If you only have shares registered in your name in the Register of Members (maintained by or on behalf of the Company), you should insert that number of shares.  If you have shares entered against your name in the Depository Register and shares registered in your name in the Register of Members, you should insert the aggregate number of shares.  If no number is inserted, the instrument appointing a proxy or proxies shall be deemed to relate to all the shares held by you.', '2. (a) A member who is not a relevant intermediary is entitled to appoint not more than two proxies to attend, speak and vote at the meeting. Where such   member’s form of proxy appoints more than one proxy, the proportion of the shareholding concerned to be represented by each proxy shall be   specified in the form of proxy.(b)  A member who is a relevant intermediary is entitled to appoint more than two proxies to attend, speak and vote at the meeting, but each proxy must be   appointed to exercise the rights attached to a different share or shares held by such member. Where such member’s form of proxy appoints more than   two proxies, the number and class of shares in relation to which each proxy has been appointed shall be specified in the form of proxy. “Relevant intermediary” has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 181 of the Companies Act, Cap. 50 of Singapore.', 'Robinson Road, #05-01, Singapore 068902, not less than 72 hours before the time appointed for the Annual General Meeting. Completion and return of the instrument appointing a proxy or proxies shall not preclude a member from attending and voting at the meeting. In such event, the relevant instrument appointing a proxy or proxies will be deemed to be revoked.', '5. The instrument appointing a proxy or proxies must be under the hand of the appointor or of his attorney duly authorised in writing. Where the instrument appointing a proxy or proxies is executed by a corporation, it must be executed either under its seal or under the hand of an officer or attorney duly authorised.', 'Where an instrument appointing a proxy is signed on behalf of the appointor by an attorney, the letter or power of attorney or a duly certified copy thereof must (failing previous registration with the Company) be lodged with the instrument of proxy, failing which the instrument may be treated as invalid.', '7. The Company shall be entitled to reject the instrument appointing a proxy or proxies if it is incomplete, improperly completed or illegible or where the true intentions of the appointor are not ascertainable from the instructions of the appointor specified in the instrument (including any related attachment) appointing a proxy or proxies. In addition, in the case of a member whose shares are entered against his name in the Depository Register, the Company may reject any instrument appointing a proxy or proxies lodged if the member, being the appointor, is not shown to have shares entered against his name in the Depository']"
